=== BOOK 1: FARMER HANDBOOK ===
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
A holistic
perspective of
scientific
agriculture
A joint initiative to
impart farmers with
technical knowledge on
basic agriculture.
Disclaimer:
The opinions expressed provided in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of GIZ . The
designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion what-
soever on the part of GIZ concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or concerning the delimitation of
its frontiers or boundaries.
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Prepared & compiled by
Dr. P. Chandra Shekara Dr. Ajit Kumar
National Institute of Agricultural Extension Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Management (MANAGE) Navsari, Gujarat
Ministry of Agriculture, GoI India
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh
India Bakul C. Chaudhary
Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Dr. N. Balasubramani Navsari, Gujarat
National Institute of Agricultural Extension India
Management (MANAGE)
Ministry of Agriculture, GoI Mr. Max Baumann
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh Planning Officer
India Section “Agricultural Production & Resource Use”
Division 45 - Rural Development and Agriculture
Dr. Rajeev Sharma Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusam-
menarbeit (GIZ) GmbH
Dr. Chitra Shukla Germany
Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd. Max.Baumann@giz.de
Navsari, Gujarat
India
Financed by
Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd. German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation
Navsari, Gujarat, India and Development (BMZ)
Published by
Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Navsari, Gujarat
India
Second Edition: August 2016
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
The Authors acknowledge the contribution of following experts/professionals in developing the
Handbook.
Mr. Max Baumann, Planning Officer, GIZ, Germany
Mr. Fredrick Oberthur, Planning Officer, GIZ, Germany
Mr. Ajit Kumar Desai, Chairman, DFV, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr. Sashidhar, Professor, University of Agriculture and Horticultural Sciences, Shimoga, Karnataka
Dr. Syed Ahmed Hussain, Professor, ANGRAU, Hyderabad, Telangana
Mr. V.Gunasekaran,Agricultural Officer, Pesticide Testing Laboratory, Dharmapuri, Tamilnadu
Dr. M.V.Shantharam, Former Dean, ANGRAU, Hyderabad, Telangana
Dr. K. Kareemulla, Principal Scientist, NAARM, Hyderabad, Telangana
Dr. K.V. Jayaraghavendra Rao, Principal Scientist, NAARM, Hyderabad, Telangana
Mr. Thomas A Vivian, Assistant Professor, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra
Prof. T. M. Bahale, Professor of Agronomy, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra
Dr. R. K Rahane, Professor of Agricultural Economics, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra
Dr. G. D. Patil, Professor of Soil Science & Agricultural Chemistry, College of Agriculture, D
hule, Maharastra
Dr. D. N. Padule, Professor of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra
Dr. A. R. Pathak, Vice Chancellor, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr. J. B. Patel, Professor, Anand Agricultural University, Anand, Gujarat
Dr. Bhaskar Gaikwad, Programme, Coordinator, KVK, Babhaleshwar, Maharashtra
Mr. Mahendra Dhaibar, CEO, Sustainable Agricultural Development Foundation, Pune, Maharashtra
Dr. R. M. Pankhaniya, Associate Professor, Department of Agronomy, NM College of Agriculture,
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr A. M. Bafna, Principal & Dean, Aspee Agri-Business Management Institute, Navsari Agricultural
University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr G. G. Radadia, Professor & Head, Department of Entomology, NM College of Agriculture, Navsari
Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr B. P. Mehta, Professor, Department of Plant Pathology, Aspee College of Horticulture and Forestry,
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr. L. J. Desai, Associate Professor, Department of Agronomy, NM College of Agriculture
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr. N. S. Manohar, Associate Professor, Department of Agricultural Economics, Aspee College of
Horticulture and Forestry, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr O P Sharma, Associate Professor & Head, Department of Extension Education, College of Veterinary
Science & AH, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat
Dr. Bruno Schuler, Advisor and Planning Officer, Sustainable Agriculture-Rural Development, GIZ,
Germany
Mr. Rajiv Ahuja, Technical Expert, Natural Resource Management, GIZ, India
Mr. Akhil Dev, Junior Technical Expert, Natural Resource Management, GIZ, India
Acknowledgement
Higher demand for agricultural raw material is now anticipated and agriculture is not any more about
producing farm products and selling them exclusively at the local market. Instead farmers today have
a world market to serve. But the new chances bring new challenges. Farmers and agricultural enterprises,
willing to be part of the new expanding world market, not only have to take into consideration customers’
preferences whom they want to serve, but also adhere to international trade regulations set by WTO and
comply with high production and quality standards required by the importing countries.
Agriculture contributes around 17% to GDP and continues to be among the most important and success-
ful sectors in India. Around 58% of the Indian population depend on agriculture for their livelihood. Apart
from delivering the local industries with top quality raw materials for processing, agriculture provides
almost 10% of total export earnings. However, to support the impressive Indian economic growth in the
coming years, agriculture will have to contribute more towards value addition, productivity enhancement,
high quality products and trained manpower to successfully tackle these challenges.
The states of Gujarat and Maharashtra have competitive advantages for the production of several com-
modities. However, productivity and competitiveness remains low. Rising quality requirements of export
and domestic markets require an up-scaling of the production which is only feasible with educated farmers
and skilled workers.
Desai Fruits and Vegetables (DFV)in cooperation with the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit(GIZ) GmbH on behalf of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and
Development (BMZ) takes up the existing education gap by implementing a development partnership
called “Partnership Farming India”.
The goal of Partnership Farming India (PFI) is to enable farmers to be self-sufficient decision-makers,
“agripreneurs”, which allows for a more flexible production system and highlights farming as profession by
choice and not by inheritance.
Furthermore, PFI strengthens farmers’ and farm workers’ management skills to adopt modern agricul-
tural practices and concepts and enhance the international competitiveness of smallholders’ agricultural
produce by giving farmers and workers in Gujarat and Maharashtra access to practical agricultural educa-
tion. Therefore, DFV and GIZ in close cooperation with the National Institute of Agricultural Extension
Management (MANAGE, an organization of Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India) developed the
training material on basic agricultural knowledge and skills.
The states of Gujarat and Maharashtra will serve as an example on how to establish long term successful
and trustful business relationships by combining small scale production in the field with large scale pro-
cessing and marketing. I am confident that this effort will serve the Indian agriculture as a replicable model
make lasting contributions towards sustainable agriculture and prosperous farmers.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the people and institutions namely MANAGE, DFV and
GIZ,which supported this project and enabled making information available. This is a useful source of in-
formation for farmers, trainers, and other interested persons to improve not only the agriculture but also
the livelihood of the farming community.
Mrs. Sabine Preuss
GIZ-India Programme Director
Natural Resource Management
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Preface
Agriculture is an important sector of Indian Economy as more than half of its population relies on Ag-
riculture as principle source of income. Research and Extension systems play major role in generation
and dissemination of Agricultural technologies aiming at enhancing the income of farmers. The extension
system adopts series of extension methods such as Training, demonstration, exposure visit to transfer
the technologies from lab to land. Majority of these extension efforts mainly focus on location and crop
specific technologies, and mostly on solution to problem basis. However, there is a need for equipping the
farmers with Basic knowledge of Agriculture in order to create a better knowledge platform at farmer level
for taking appropriate farm management decisions and to absorb modern technologies.
In view of this, Desai Fruits and Vegetables Pvt. Ltd. (DFV), India, in cooperation with the Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH on behalf of the German Federal Ministry
for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) in close cooperation with National Institute of Ag-
ricultural Extension Management (MANAGE- An Organization of Ministry of Agriculture, Government
of India) brought out Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture to impart technical knowledge on Basic
Agriculture to farmers to provide holistic perspective of scientific Agriculture.
This handbook is a product of series of brainstorming workshops and consultative meetings with various
stakeholders such as Researchers, Academicians, Extension Functionaries, Agripreneurs, Master Trainers
and Farmers. Based on the identified needs, the topics were prioritized and contents were developed with
the help of experts. The farmer-friendly content has been written in simple language, using more pictures
with practical examples for the benefit of farmers.
The book contains six chapters, each focusing on a particular topic. The first chapter, “General conditions
for cultivation of crops”, talks about the basic needs of farmers and farming sector, by providing basic
knowledge on Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), enhancing the awareness of farmers on critical factors
in selection of crops and cropping patterns, judicious use of natural resources such as soil and water, and
emphasizing the importance of mechanization in the field of agriculture.
The second chapter “Soil and Plant Nutrition” is aimed at increasing the awareness and understanding of
farmers about soil, it’s structure, physical, chemical, biological properties, soil fertility and managing the
soil fertility in an economically and environmentally sustainable manner. It also focuses on the need for
soil testing, plant nutrition requirement, organic & inorganic fertilizers, and Integrated Nutrient Manage-
ment (INM) for efficient, economic and sustainable production of crops.
The third chapter of the book is about Pest Management, and focuses on enhancing the awareness of and
understanding among farmers about the crop pests, diseases and weed management through Integrated
Pest Management. It also aims at sensitizing farmers on safe handling of chemicals and plant protection
equipments as also elaborated further in the fifth chapter on “Occupational health and safety of farmers”.
It creates awareness about causes, preventive measures of health hazards, risks & fatalities in agriculture,
and use of first aid in emergencies. It further includes safety tips and care to reduce the risk of injuries and
fatalities while handling machineries and pesticides by farmers.
Time and resources management is an integral part of each and every activity, be it service sector, busi-
ness or day-to-day activities of life. Farming sector too has not remained untouched by it. Therefore, the
fourth chapter of the book is devoted to “Farm Management”. It is to educate and equip the farmers to
make proper plans, take appropriate decisions and also to take advantage of the improved technologies
to increase production, assure food security for the family and market opportunities to increase income
considering available resources, anticipated risks, including market fluctuations.
“Farmer’s access to services”, the last chapter of the book, aims at enhancing awareness among farmers
about sources of extension, information and services, public and private extension services, agricultural
credit, insurance and legal aspects through Information & Communication Technologies. The content is
useful not only for farmers but also for other stakeholders involved in farm advisory services such as Agri
input dealers, Agripreneurs, Kisan Call Centers and extension functionaries working at grass roots level.
We trust that this Handbook will benefit maximum number of farmers to make farming economically and
environmentally more sustainable.
B. Srinivas, IAS
Director General
MANAGE
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Contents
1. General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops 1-32
2. Soil and Plant Nutrition 33-70
3. Plant Protection 71-96
4. Categories of Pesticides and Precautions 97-98
5. Farm Management 99-120
6. Occupational Health and Safety 121-130
7. Farmer’s Access to Service 131-136
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1. General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.1. Objectives of the session
• To enhance awareness of farmers on critical factors in selection of crops and cropping patterns.
• To create an understanding on judicious use of natural resources such as soil and water.
• To provide basic knowledge on seed and cropping systems.
• To emphasize the importance of mechanization.
• To sensitize the farmers on Good Agricultural Practices (GAP).
1.2. What do we know at the end of the session
• Critical factors in selection of crops and cropping patterns
• Judicious use of natural resources such as soil and water
• Basic knowledge on seed
• Cropping systems
• Mechanization
• Good Agricultural Practices (GAP)
Agricultural Universities, Research Institutes, The above study clearly indicates that the knowl-
Krishi Vigyan Kendras have been generat- edge gap is prevailing among farmers and those who
ing ample technologies to improve the productiv- have access to knowledge harvested better profits.
ity and profitability of the farmers. How many of
Increase in productivity and profitability can be
these technologies are reaching the farmers? Base-
achieved through:
line Situation Assessment conducted by Partner-
ship farming in India, in Gujarat and Maharashtra, • Blending practical knowledge with scientific
clearly indicated that farmers with access to techni- technologies
cal knowledge on agriculture realized better income • Efficient use of natural resources
compared to others. Fifty one percent of sample • Adopting time specific management prac-
farmers who were part of partnership farming In- tices
dia had knowledge of soil testing compared to only • Giving priority for quality driven produc-
28% of control group. Mulching and intercropping tion
as a practice were not widely adopted by control • Adopting suitable farming systems
group of farmers. They were less aware about other • Adoption of location specific technology
organic fertilizers. Fertigation as a method of appli- • Market demand driven production
cation of fertilizers was not widely practiced by con- • Adopting low cost and no cost technologies
trol group. Farmers who accessed information from
agricultural universities and magazines were less in
number in the control group. The treatment farmers
had an average yield of 35.65 tons and control farm-
ers had yield of 22.36 tons of banana per acre. The
average net income of the treatment farmers was Rs
93,822 and for the control farmers Rs.81,659. More
than 85% of the farmers wanted basic education on
agriculture and crop production and ready to pay
for undergoing such basic education and training.
There was a clear interest in the farmers to improve
their skill and knowledge and they were ready to
pay for the service.
1
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
2
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.3. Factors influencing decisions on • What are the risks you are anticipating in the
proposed crop/cropping system?
the selection of crops and cropping
• Do you have the solution? Can you manage the
system
risks?
• Is it worth to take the risks for anticipated prof-
its?
Climatic factors
Economic conditions of farmers
Is the crop/cropping system suitable for local weath-
er parameters such as temperature, rainfall, sun including land holding
shine hours, relative humidity, wind velocity, wind
• Are the proposed crop/cropping systems suit-
direction, seasons and agro-ecological situations?
able for your size of land holding?
• Are your financial resources adequate to man-
Soil conditions
age the proposed crop/cropping system?
• If not, can you mobilize financial resources
Is the crop/cropping system suitable for local soil
through alternative routes?
type, pH and soil fertility?
Labour availability and mechanization
Water
potential
• Do you have adequate water source like a tanks,
• Can you manage the proposed crop/cropping
wells, dams, etc.?
system through your family labour?
• Do you receive adequate rainfall?
• If not, do you have adequate labours to manage
• Is the distribution of rainfall suitable to grow
the same?
identified crops?
• Is family/hired labour equipped to handle the
• Is the water quality suitable?
proposed crop/cropping system?
• Is electricity available for lifting the water?
• Are there any mechanization options to substi-
• Do you have pump sets, micro irrigation sys-
tute the labour?
tems?
• Is machinery available? Affordable? Cost effec-
Cropping system options tive?
• Is family/hired labour equipped to handle the
• Do you have the opportunity to go for inter- machinery?
cropping, mixed cropping, multi-storeyed
Technology availability and suitability
cropping, relay cropping, crop rotation, etc.?
• Do you have the knowledge on cropping sys-
• Is the proposed crop/cropping system suitable?
tems management?
• Do you have technologies for the proposed
Past and present experiences of crop/cropping system?
• Do you have extension access to get the tech-
farmers
nologies?
• Are technologies economically feasible and
• What were your previous experiences with re-
technically viable?
gard to the crop/cropping systems that you are
• Are technologies complex or user-friendly?
planning to choose?
• What is the opinion of your friends, relatives
Market demand and availability of
and neighbours on proposed crop/cropping
market infrastructure
systems?
Expected profit and risk • Are the crops proposed in market demand?
• Do you have market infrastructure to sell your
• How much profit are you expecting from the produce?
proposed crop/cropping system? • Do you have organized marketing system to re-
• Whether this profit is better than the existing duce the intermediaries?
crop/cropping system? • Do you have answers for questions such as
3
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
where to sell? When to sell? Whom to sell to? crop/cropping systems with his existing resources
What form to sell in? What price to sell for? and other conditions. Thereby, they justify choosing
• Do you get real time market information and or rejecting a crop/cropping systems. This process
market intelligence on proposed crops? enables the farmers to undertake a SWOT analysis
internally which in turn guides them to take an ap-
Policies and schemes
propriate decision.
• Do Government policies favour your crops?
1.4. Climatic factors
• Is there any existing scheme which incentivises
your crop? Climate and agriculture
• Are you eligible to avail those benefits?
• Monsoon is a key source of water in agriculture
Public and private extension influence
• Most of our rivers are seasonal fed by the mon-
soon; even irrigated agriculture depends on
Do you have access to Agricultural Technology
monsoon.
Management Agency (ATMA)/ Departmental
• Cropping pattern has evolved over years based
extension functionaries to get advisory?
on climate.
• Do you know Kissan Call Center? • Market forces influence cropping patterns in
• Do you have access to KVKs, Agricultural Uni- recent times.
versities and ICAR organizations?
Climatic factors and crops
• Do you subscribe agricultural magazines?
• Do you read agricultural articles in newspa-
• Rainfall drives water availability and deter-
pers?
mines sowing time (rainfed crops).
• Do you get any support from input dealers, Ag-
• Temperature drives crop growth, duration and
ribusiness Companies, NGOs, Agriclinics and
influences milk production in animals.
Agribusiness Centers?
• Temperature and relative humidity influence
pest and diseases incidence on crops, livestock
Availability of required agricultural
and poultry.
inputs including agricultural credit
• Wet and dry spells cause significant impact on
standing crops, physiology, loss of economic
• Do you get adequate agricultural inputs such as
products (e.g. fruit drop).
seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, and implements in
• Extreme events (e.g. high rainfall, floods, heat /
time?
cold wave, cyclone, hail, frost) cause enormous
• Do you have access to institutional credit?
losses of standing crops, livestock and fisheries.
Post harvest storage and processing
Climate and seasons
technologies
• Rainy (June-September) season also known
• Do you have your own storage facility?
as Kharif, supports most of the rainfed crops
• If not, do you have access to such facility?
(coarse cereals, pulses, oilseeds, etc.).
• Do you have access to primary processing facil-
• Post-rainy (October-February) season also
ity?
known as Rabi, supports the irrigated or stored
• Do you know technologies for value addition of
moisture grown crops (wheat, mustard, chick-
your crop?
pea, etc.).
• Do you have market linkage for value added
• Summer season (March-May) supports short
products?
duration pulses and vegetables.
• Are you aware about required quality standards
• Rabi production is more assured, has a higher
of value added products of proposed crops?
yield and reduces pest and disease related prob-
Farmers need to answer all the above questions lems.
while making decisions for choosing a crop/ • Over time, with irrigation development, the
cropping pattern. During this decision making pro- contribution of Kharif is declining and Rabi is
cess, farmer cross check the suitability of proposed increasing.
4
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Climate, cropping pattern and agricul-
tural production issues
• Cropping patterns based on climate and land
capability are sustainable but market forces and
farmers’ aspirations are forcing unsustainable
systems.
• Farmers must innovate in producing more even
from less endowed areas by adopting suitable
technologies to cope with changing climate.
• Climate change will likely to cause further
problems in our crop production and is likely
to become the most important environmental
issue in the 21st century. Impact of Drought
Important agricultural related factors
responsible for climate change
• Deforestation and forest degradation
• Burning of fuel and farm waste
• Water logged condition
• Excessive use of external input
• Large-scale conversion of land for non-agricul-
tural purpose
Impact of climate change in India
Impact of Flood
• Rainfall: No long-term trend noted. However,
regional variations seen, increased summer
rainfall and less number of rainy days.
• Temperature: About 0.6 ºC rise in surface tem-
perature during 100 years. Projected to increase
3.5 to 5 ºC by 2100.
• Carbon dioxide: Increasing at the rate of 1.9
ppm per year and expected to reach 550 ppm
by 2050 and 700 ppm by 2100.
• Extreme events: Increased frequency of heat
wave, cold wave, droughts and floods observed
during last decade. Heat Wave on Maize
• Rising sea level: Rise of 2.5 mm/year since 1950.
• Glaciers: Rapid melting of the glaciers in the
Himalayas.
• Rainfall distribution: Shift in peak rainfall dis-
tribution also noticed in some parts of country.
Expected impact of climate change on
agriculture
• Due to increase in temperature, crop may re-
quire more water.
• Yield may be reduced in cereal crops especially
Cold wave damage to chana harvest
in Rabi; i.e. wheat.
5
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Change in pest and disease scenario • Change in rainfall volume and frequency as
well as wind may alter the severity, frequency
due to climate change
and extent of soil erosion.
• Due to increase in rainfall: Pests like bollworm, • Rise in sea level may lead to salt water entry in
red hairy caterpillar and leaf spot diseases may the coastal lands turning them less suitable for
increase.Due to increase in temperature: Suck- conventional agriculture.
ing pests such as mites and leaf miner may in-
Livestock
crease.
• Affect feed production and nutrition of live-
• Due to variation in rainfall and temperature:
stock. Increased temperature would reduce di-
Pest and diseases of crops to be altered because
gestibility. Increased water scarcity would also
of more enhanced pathogen and vector devel-
decrease the food and fodder production.
opment, rapid pathogen transmission and in-
• Major impacts on vector-borne diseases
creased host susceptibility. Sometimes a minor
through expansion of vector populations dur-
pest may become a major pest.
ing rainy years, leading to large outbreaks of
• Agricultural biodiversity is also threatened by
diseases.
decreased rainfall and increased temperature,
• Increase water, shelter, and energy require-
sea level rise and increased frequency and se-
ment of livestock for meeting projected milk
verity of drought, cyclone and flood. Quality
demands.
of farm products such as fruits, vegetables, tea,
• Climate change is likely to aggravate heat stress
coffee, aromatic and medicinal plants may be
in dairy animals, adversely affecting their re-
affected.
productive performance.
Water
Fishery
• Demand for irrigation to increase with in-
• Increased sea and river water temperature is
creased temperature and higher amount of
likely to affect fish breeding, migration and har-
evapo-transpiration. This may result in lower-
vest.
ing of groundwater table at some places.
• Impacts of increased temperature and tropical
• The melting of glaciers in the Himalayas will
cyclonic activity would affect capture, produc-
increase water availability in the Ganga, Brah-
tion and marketing costs of the marine fish.
maputra and their tributaries in the short-run
but in the long-run the availability of water will
Coping options for farmers
decrease considerably.
• A significant increase in runoff is projected in Access to information
the rainy season, however, may not be very ben-
eficial unless storage infrastructure could be • Progressive Farmers
vastly expanded. This extra water in the rainy • ATMA extension functionaries – Block Tech-
season, on the other hand, may lead to increase nology Manager, SMS, farmer friend, Farm
in frequency and duration of floods. School
• The water balance in different parts of India will • Trained input dealers
be disturbed and the quality of ground water • Agri Clinics and Agribusiness Centers
along costal track will be more affected due to • KVK
intrusion of sea water. • Agricultural Research Stations
• Agricultural Universities
Soil
• ICAR Organisations
• Organic matter content, which is already quite
• Kissan Call Centers (Toll free no.1551 or 1800
low in Indian soil, would become even lower.
– 180 – 1551)
Quality of soil organic matter may be affected.
• Concerned NGOs
• Reduction in rate of decomposition and nutri-
• Agribusiness Companies
ent supply.
• Radio, TV, Agricultural Magzines, Community
• Increase in soil temperature may reduce Nitro-
Radio, Newspapers, Agricultural Websites etc.
gen availability due to volatilization and deni-
trification.
6
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Coping options for farmers
Enlarging the Food Basket
• Diversifying the livelihood sources.
• Changing cropping patterns.
• Increased traditional coping strategies.
• Change to a mixed cropping pattern.
E.g: Crop Mixture-Nutri Millets, Pulses and Oilseed
Integrated Farming System
• Increased share of non-agricultural activities
E.g: Type of Integrated Farming Systems
Agriculture +vegetable cultivation
Agriculture + animal husbandry
Neem, Mulberry & Cowpea
• Planting more drought tolerant crops and in-
creased agro-forestry practices.
• Agro-forestry systems to provide more sta-
ble incomes during years of extreme weather
events.
Mango, Pumpkin, maize mixed
cropping
Mixed farming/Multi level farming
7
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Coping options for farmers continued....
Lucerne & Sunhemp for green
manuring & fodder
Farm Pond
Conservation Furrow
• Improved on-farm soil & water conservation.
• Adopting scientific water management, nutri-
ent management and cultural practices.
Vegetative Barriers
Percolation Tanks
8
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Coping options for farmers continued....
Contour trenching for runoff collec-
tion
Conventional Raised Bed Planting
• 20-25% Saving in irrigation water
Shelterbelts
• Shelterbelts reduce wind velocity.
• Moderate temperature.
• Reduce evaporative loss and conserve soil
moisture.
Straw Thatching
• Protecting young seedlings against cold by cov-
ering with straw thatching.
Frost Protection
9
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.5. Soil and Water Conservation into granules
• Die and decay increase pore space and water
Soil and water are our precious heritage. Hence, holding capacity
it is obligatory on our part to protect and hand • One cubic meter of soil has several kilometres
over these resources to further generations. It is of root fibre
estimated that about 50% of the cultivated area in • More vegetative cover, most active soil fauna,
India suffers from severe soil erosion and requires channels of earth worm, beetles and other life
remedial measures. • Vegetation increases the storage capacity of
the soil for rainfall by the transpiration of large
• Water resources are essential for increasing and
quantities of moistures from the soil
stabilizing crop production.
• Wind erosion has been responsible for destroy-
Soil erosion
ing the valuable top soil.
Soil erosion is the detachment and transportation
of soil material from one place to another through
1.5.1. Degradation of soil and water
the action of wind, water in motion or by the hitting
takes place with water and wind ero-
action of the rain drops.
sion
• When the vegetation is removed and land is
• The main cause of water erosion is unmanaged put under cultivation the natural equilibrium
runoff. between soil building and soil removal is dis-
• Runoff is the portion of the rainfall or irriga- turbed.
tion water applied which leaves a field either as • The removal of surface soil takes place at a
surface or as subsurface flow. much faster rate than it can be built up by the
soil forming process.
Several factors are responsible for runoff
• Climatic factors: Precipitation characteristics - Erosion by water: Known as water erosion, is
duration, intensity, distribution, direction, tem- the removal of soil from the lands surface by water
perature, humidity, wind velocity. in motion.
• Watershed characteristics: Geological shape of
Sheet erosion: The removal of a thin relatively
the catchments, size and shape of the catch-
uniform layer of soil particles by the action of rain-
ments, topography, drainage pattern.
fall and runoff.
• Barren land without vegetation
• Extremely harmful
• Soil types:
• Usually so slow that the farmer is not conscious
• Sandy soil: Average rain – no problem of
of its existence
erosion. High intensity – More serious of
• Common on lands having a gentle uniform
less binding material i.e. fine soil particle.
slope
• Clay soil: Ordinary rain – more runoff in
• Results in the uniform removal of the cream of
moderate and steep slopes but high water
the top soil with every heavy rain
holding capacity.
• Shallow top soil overlies a tight sub soil are most
• Silt loam, loamy and fine sandy loam: More
susceptible to sheet erosion
desirable soils from the point of view of
• Movement of soil by rain drop splash is the pri-
minimizing soil erosion.
mary cause of sheet erosion
How vegetation reduces runoff • Sheet erosion has damaged millions of hectares
• Interception of rainfall of slopping land throughout the India
• Root structure
Rill erosion is the removal of soil by running wa-
• Biological influences
ter with the formation of shallow channels that can
• Transpiration effects
be smoothed out completely by normal cultivation.
• Intercept, absorb the impact of raindrop
• There is no sharp lines of demarcation where
• Hindrance to runoff water slows down the rate
sheet erosion and rill erosion begins but rill
at which travels down the slope
erosion is more readily apparent than sheet ero-
• Knitting and binding effect aggregates the soil
sion.
10
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
• Rills develop when there is a concentration
of runoff water which, if neglected, grow into
large gullies.
• More serious in soils having a loose shallow top
soil.
• Transition stage between sheet erosion and gul-
lying.
Gully erosion: Removal of soil by running wa-
ter with the formation of channels that cannot be
smoothed out completely by cultivation.
• Advance stage of rill erosion.
• Any concentration of surface runoff is a poten-
tial source of gullying.
Sheet and Rill Erosion
• Cattle paths, cart tracks, dead furrows, tillage
furrows or other small depression down a slope
favour concentration of flow.
• Unattended rills deepen and widen every year
and begin to attain the form of gullies.
• Unattended gullies may result over a few years
for an entire landscape to be filled with a net-
work of gullies.
• More spectacular than other type of erosions.
Stream channel erosion: Erosion caused by
stream flow.
Gully Erosion
• Closely resembles rill erosion.
• Intensive channel erosion areas are on the
outside of lands where flow shear stresses are
high.
Mass movement: Enmass movement of soil.
• Landslides, land slips, soil and mudflows are
various forms of mass movement.
Wind erosion: Movement of soil particles is
caused by wind force exerted against or parallel to
Landslide surface of the ground.
1.5.2. Conservation
Conservation is the utilization without wastage of
resources is required to ensure a high level of pro-
duction.
Important soil conservation measures are
• Conservation Tillage
• Minimum tillage
• Zero tillage
• Stubble mulching
Shelterbelts for Moderating microclimate
• Trash farming
11
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Conservation farming • Bench terrace
• Farming across the slope • Water harvesting and recycling
• Strip cropping
Zero tillage
• Rotations
• Several practices are in use such as zero till-
• Mixed cropping and intercropping
age, minimum tillage and direct seeding.
• Surface mulching
• Planting crops in previously untilled soil by
• Timely farm operations
opening a narrow slot, trench or band only
• Improved water user efficiency
of sufficient width and depth to obtain seed
• Land levelling
coverage. No other soil tillage is done.
• Providing safe drainage
• Intermittent terraces Advantages of zero tillage farming
• Growing vegetation on the bunds • Erosion control: Retained stubble and crop
residue reduces soil erosion and enhances
Vegetation and vegetative management
soil fertility
• Strip cropping
• Moisture conservation: Stubble traps water,
• Stubble mulching
reduce runoff water, better infiltration lead-
• Mulching
ing to improved soil moisture condition
• Higher nitrogen availability
Wind erosion management
• Seedling protection: Stubbles protects young
• Protect the soil surface with a cover of vegeta-
seedling from wind and heat
tion or vegetative residues.
• Crop yields will be on par with traditional
• Produce or bring to the surface soil aggregates
tillage system. However good yield can be
or clods which are large enough to resist the
harvested during dry years
wind force.
• Reduce labour and save time
• Roughen the land surface to reduce wind veloc-
• Savings on equipment cost
ity and trap drifting soil.
• Savings on oil/fuel cost
• Establish barriers or trap strips at intervals to
reduce wind velocity and soil drifting. Mulching: Benefits of crop residue mulch-
ing are
Best practices to control soil blowing
• Increased availability of water and organic
• Deep ploughing
matter
• Summer ploughing
• Less erosion
• Surface roughness
• Environment protection
• Conserving moisture
• Wind breaks and shelterbelts Additional benefit to farmers
• Mechanical or vegetative barriers
• Less drought susceptibility
• Improved soil quality and fertilizer efficiency
For instance: Shelterbelts for moderating micro-
• Minimises long term dependency on external
climate
inputs
• Shelterbelts reduce wind velocity
• Moderate temperature
• Reduce evaporative loss and conserve soil
moisture
Water erosion can be managed by
• In situ water harvesting
• Summer ploughing
Overland flow management
• Contour bund
• Graded bund
• Broad based bund
12
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.6. Irrigation water for longer periods.
• Basin irrigation is suitable for many field
An adequate water supply is important for plant crops.
growth. When rainfall is not sufficient, the • Crops suitable for basin irrigation include
plants must receive additional water from irriga- pastures, citrus, banana and crops that are
tion. broadcasted such as cereals and to some
extent row crops such as tobacco.
Points consider for irrigation decisions
• Basin irrigation is generally not suited to
crops, which cannot stand in wet or water-
• Land suitability for irrigation like slope
logged conditions for periods longer than 24
• Effective rainfall: Part of the total rain is useful
hours; eg: potatoes, beet root and carrots
for crop production
• The flatter the land surface, the easier it is to
• When to irrigate: Decide based on soil, crop
construct basins.
and climatic condition
• It is also possible to construct basins on
• How much to irrigate: Decide based on crop
sloping land, even when the slope is quite
water requirement
steep. Level basins, called terraces, can be
• How to irrigate: Select appropriate method for
constructed like the steps of a staircase.
irrigation
• Soils suitable for basin irrigation depend on
• Quality of irrigation water
the crop grown.
1.6.1. Various methods can be used to
Basin should be small if the:
supply irrigation water to the plants
• Slope of the land is steep
• Soil is sandy
• Surface irrigation:
• Stream size to the basin is small
• Basin irrigation
• Required depth of the irrigation application
• Furrow irrigation
is small
• Sprinkler irrigation
• Field preparation is done by hand or animal
• Drip irrigation
power
Surface Irrigation
Basin can be large if the:
Surface irrigation is the application of water by
• Slope of the land is gentle or flat
gravity flow to the surface of the field.
• Soil is clay
• Either the entire field is flooded (Basin Irriga- • Stream size to the basin is large
tion) or the water is fed into small channels • Required depth of the irrigation application
(furrows) or strips of land (borders). is large
• Field preparation is mechanized
Basin Irrigation
• The land slope, the soil type, the available
• Basins are flat areas of land, surrounded by stream size, the required depth of the ir-
low bunds. rigation application and farming practices
• The bunds prevent the water from flowing mainly determine the shape and size of
to the adjacent fields. basins
• Basin irrigation is commonly used for rice
grown on flat lands or in terraces on hill- • If the land slope is steep, the basin should be
sides. Paddy grows best when its roots are narrow; otherwise too much earth move-
submerged in water. Hence, basin irrigation ment will be needed to obtain level basins.
is the best method to use for this kind of • Three other factors, which may affect basin
crop. width, are depth of fertile soil, method of
• Trees can also be grown in basins, where basin construction, agricultural practices.
one tree is usually located in the middle of a • There are two methods to supply irrigation
small basin. water to basins: (i) The direct method: Ir-
• In general, the basin method is suitable for rigation water is led directly from the field
crops that are no affected by standing in channel into the basin through siphons,
13
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
or bund breaks. (ii) The cascade method: • Irrigation water flows from the field channel
irrigation water is supplied to the highest into the furrows by opening up the bank of the
terrace, and then allowed to flow to a lower channel or by means of siphons or spiles.
terrace and so on. • Furrows must be on consonance with the slope,
soil type, stream size, irrigation depth, cultiva-
Maintenance of basins
tion practice and field length.
• Bunds are susceptible to erosion. This may
• Uniform flat or gentle slopes are preferred for
be caused by, for example, rainfall, flood or
furrow irrigation.
the passing of people when used as foot-
• On undulating land, furrows should follow the
paths.
land contours.
• Rats may dig holes in the sides of the bunds.
• Therefore, it is important to check the bunds Advantages of furrow irrigation
regularly, notice defects and repair them • Suitable for row crops and vegetables.
instantly, before greater damage is done. • Suitable for soils in which the infiltration
rates vary between 0.5 and 2.5 cm/hr.
Advantages of basin irrigation
• Ideal for slopes varying from 0.2 to 0.5 per
• Conservation of rainfall and reduction in
cent and a stream size of 1-2 liters/sec.
soil erosion.
• In areas requiring surface drainage or prone
• High water application and distribution ef-
to temporary water logging, furrows are
ficiencies.
very effective.
• Useful in leaching of salts.
• In areas where water for irrigation purposes.
• Suitable to all close growing crops, row
is scarce, the practice of alternate or skip
crops and orchards.
furrow irrigation can save considerable
quantity of water without significantly af-
fecting yields.
Basin Irrigation
Furrow irrigation
• Furrows are small channels, which carry water Furrow Irrigation
down the land slope between the crop rows.
• Water infiltrates into the soil as it moves along Sprinkler irrigation
the slope. Water is pumped through a pipe system and then
• The crop is usually grown on the ridges be- sprayed onto the crops through sprinkler heads.
tween the furrows.
Advantages
• This method is suitable for all row crops and for
• Water conservation
crops that cannot stand in water for long peri-
• Soil conservation
ods. Crops such as maize, sunflower, sugarcane,
• Efficient use of water
and soybean can be irrigated by furrow irriga-
• Saving of labour
tion.
• Early seed germination
• Crops that would be damaged by inundation,
• Fertigations
such as tomatoes, vegetables, potatoes, beans;
• Soil amendments
fruit trees like citrus and grape as well as broad-
• Frost protection
casted crops like wheat.
14
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
• Cooling of crops Response of different crops to sprinkler irrigation
• Higher pro+ductivity of crops Crop Water Yield
saving (%) increase (%)
Water is applied Bajra 56 19
Barley 56 16
At low rate
Bhendi 28 23
Over a long period of time.
Cabbage 40 3
At frequent intervals
Directly into the plant’s root zone Cauliflower 35 12
Chillies 33 24
Drip Irrigation Cotton 36 50
Cowpea 19 3
Use of Sprinklers for different crops Fenugreek 29 25
Crop Type Crop Example Garlic 28 6
Cereals Maize, Sorghum, Wheat, Jowar Gram 69 57
Flowers Carnation, Jasmine, Marigold Groundnut 20 40
Oilseeds Groundnut, Mustard, Sunflower Jowar 55 34
Vegetables Onion, Potato, Radish, Carrot Lucerne 16 27
Fodders Asparagus, Pastures Maize 41 36
Pulses Gram, Pigeon pea, Beans Onion 33 23
Plantation Coffee, Rubber, Tamarind Potato 46 4
Fibre Cotton, Sesame Sunflower 33 20
Spices Cardamom Wheat 35 24
Lay out of Sprinkler Irrigation System
15
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Drip irrigation A typical drip irrigation system consists of the
Water is conveyed under pressure through a pipe following components:
system to the fields, from where it is discharged • Pump unit
slowly or at a pre designed rate. The latter can be • Control unit
matched to the soil infiltration capacity through • Filtering unit
emitters or drippers that are located close to the • Mainline and sub mainlines
root zone of the plants. • Laterals
• Emitters
Head Control Unit
Critical stages for irrigation in different crops
Name of the Crop Critical Stages
Cereals
Rice/Paddy Tillering, Panicle Initiation, Heading and Flowering
Wheat Crown Root Initiation, Tillering to Booting
Sorghum Booting, Blooming and Milky Dough Stage
Maize Silking and Tasseling to Dough Stage
Pearl millet Heading and Flowering
Finger millet Primordial Initiation and Flowering
Pulses
Chickpea Late Vegetative Phage
Black gram Flowering and Pod Setting
Green gram Flowering and Pod Setting
Beans Flowering and Pod Setting
Peas Flowering and Early Pod Formation
Alfalfa After Cutting and Flowering
16
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Name of the Crop Critical Stages
Oil Seeds
Ground nut Flowering, Peg Formation and Pod Development
Sesame Blooming to Maturity
Sunflower Pre-flowering to Post-flowering
Soybean Blooming and Seed Formation
Vegetables
Onion Bulb Formation and Pre-maturity
Tomato Flowering and Fruit Setting
Chilies Flowering and Fruit Setting
Cabbage Head Formation
Potato Tuber Initiation to Maturity
Carrot Root Enlargement
Others
Cotton Flowering and Boll Formation
Citrus Flowering, Fruit Setting and Fruit Enlargement
Mango Pre-flowering and Fruit Setting
Layout of micro irrigation system
Benefits of drip irrigation over surface irrigation
Crop Yield increase Water saving Crop Yield increase Water saving
(%) (%) (%) (%)
Mango 80.0 34.8 Pomegranate 98.0 45.0
Banana 52.0 45.0 Tomato 50.0 39.0
Grapevine 23.0 48.0 Watermelon 88.0 36.0
17
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Benefits of drip irrigation over surface irrigation continued....
Crop Yield increase Water saving Crop Yield increase Water saving
(%) (%) (%) (%)
Lady’s finger 16.0 40.0 Sugarcane 133.3 49.3
Brinjal 14.0 53.0 Cotton 88.0 46.6
Chillies 44.0 62.0 Onion 53.8 46.1
Papaya 75.0 68.0 Potato 79.5 54.1
On-farm irrigation efficiency of different irrigation methods
100
90%-95%
90
70%-90%
70%-85%
80
70
60 50%-70%
50
30%-60%
40
30
20
10
Flood Level Furrow Sprinkler Center Pivot Drip
Irrigation Methods
1.6.2. Centrally sponsored micro irrigation scheme
It is clear from the above diagram that drip irrigation is the most efficient irrigation in terms of water use
efficiency compared to all other methods. Flood irrigation method is found to be the most uneconomical
irrigation method in terms of water use efficiency when compared to all other methods.
In order to popularize micro irrigation, the Govt. of India is implementing the Micro Irrigation Scheme
through which interested farmers be supported. The farmers can approach nearest extension functionary.
The details are as follows:
Name of Scheme Micro Irrigation
Type Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS)
Year of Commencement 2005-06
Objectives To increase the area under efficient methods of irrigation viz. drip and
sprinkler irrigation as these methods have been recognized as the only
alternative for efficient use of surface as well as ground water resources.
18
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
%
ycneicffiE
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Salient Features • Out of the total cost of the Micro Irrigation (MI) System, 40% will be
borne by the Central Government, 10% by the State Government and
the remaining 50% will be borne by the beneficiary either through
his/her own resources or soft loan from financial institutions.
• Assistance to farmers will be for covering a maximum area of 5 hec-
tare per beneficiary family.
• Assistance for drip and sprinkler demonstration will be 75% of the
cost for a maximum area of 0.5 ha per beneficiary, which will be met
entirely by the Central Government.
• The Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) will be involved in selecting
the beneficiaries.
• All categories of farmers are covered under the Scheme. However, it
needs to be ensured that at least 25% of the beneficiaries are small
and marginal farmers.
• The scheme includes both drip and sprinkler irrigation. However,
sprinkler irrigation will be applicable only for those crops where
drip irrigation is uneconomical.
• There will be a strong HRD input for the farmers, field functionaries
and other stakeholders at different levels.
• Moreover, there will be publicity campaigns, seminars/workshops at
extensive locations to develop skills and improve awareness among
farmers about importance of water conservation and management.
• The Precision Farming Development Centres (PFDCs) will provide
research and technical support for implementing the scheme.
• Supply of good quality system both for drip and sprinkler irrigation
having BIS marking, proper after sales services to the satisfaction of
the farmer is paramount.
Subsidy Pattern: Assistance is provided @ 50% (40% by the Government
of India and 10% by the State Government) for drip/sprinkler Irrigation
System. Assistance to the extent of 75% of the cost of demonstration is
provided up to a limit of 0.5 ha.
Structure of Scheme • At the National level, National Committee on Plasticulture Applica-
tion in Horticulture (NCPAH) will be responsible for coordinating
the Scheme, while the Executive Committee of NCPAH will approve
the Action Plan. At the State level the State Micro Irrigation Com-
mittee will coordinate the programme, while at the District level the
District Micro Irrigation Committee will oversee the programme.
• The Scheme will be implemented by an Implementing Agency (IA),
appointed by the State Government, which will be the District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs) or any identified Agency, to whom
funds will be released to directly on the basis of approved district
plans for each year.
• The IA shall prepare Annual Action Plan for the District which will
be forwarded by the DMIC and SMIC for approval by the Executive
Committee (EC) of NCPAH.
Funding Pattern 80:20 by the Centre and States
19
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Eligibility As indicated in column 5 above.
Area of Operation The focus will be on horticultural crops being covered under the Na-
tional Horticulture Mission in 24 States/UTs. A cluster approach will be
adopted. The focus has also been extended to non horticultural crops.
Procedure to Apply Project proposals are submitted through the State Government for re-
lease of assistance.
1.6.3. Drainage Surface drainage: Can be achieved by following
any one of the below method based on the need and
Drainage it is a removal of water from the field as a
intensity of the problem.
moisture control mechanism.
• Land forming
• Drainage and irrigation are important aspects • Land smoothening
to be understood by the farmers • Land grading or levelling
• Drainage provides desirable environment in • Bedding system
the crop root zone • Open ditches
• Necessity of drainage is felt when there is excess
Sub surface drainage: Can be achieved by fol-
water in root zone
lowing any one of the below method based on the
• Source of excess water are
need and intensity of problem.
• Uncontrolled irrigation
• Horizontal sub surface drains
• Seepage loss from an unlined channel
• Vertical drainage
• Ground water moving from a shallow aquifers
• Other methods like
• Non maintenance of natural drainage system
• Mole drainage
Generally two types of drainage systems are adopt- • Seepage intercepting farm pond
ed based on techno-economic feasibility: • Bio drains
Subsurface
drainage system
Header
tile
Water
flow
Tile
outlet
Open
ditch
20
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.7. Seed • Breeder /Nucleus - 100%
• Foundation seed - 99.5%
A’ seed’ (in some plants, referred to as a ‘kernel’) • Certified seed - 99.0%
is a small embryonic ’plant’ enclosed in a cov- • Required level of physical purity for certifica-
ering called the seed coat, usually with some ‘stored tion
food’. Seeds fundamentally are a means of repro- • All crops - 98%
duction and most seeds are the product of ‘sexual • Carrot - 95%
reproduction’, which remixes genetic material and • High pure seed percentage
‘phenotype variability’ that ‘natural selection’ acts • Bhendi - 99.0 %
upon. • Sesame, soybean & jute - 97.0 %
• Ground nut - 96.0 %
The seed is the basic input in agriculture upon
• Free from other crop seeds
which other inputs are applied. A good vigorous
• Free from designated diseases like loose smut
seed utilizes all the resources and realizes a reason-
in wheat
able output to the grower. It is wealth to the farmer
• Free from objectionable weed seed like wild
since yesterday’s harvest is tomorrow’s hope. Good
paddy in paddy
seed in good soil realizes a good yield. Moreover, it
• Have good shape, size, colour, etc. according to
is the link between two generations.
specifications of variety
Functions of seeds • Have high physical soundness and weight
• Posses high physiological vigour and stamina
• Nourishment of the embryo
• Posses high longevity and shelf life
• Dispersal to a new location
• Have optimum moisture content for storage
• Dormancy during unfavourable conditions
• Long term storage: 8% and below
• Short term storage: 10-13%
Characteristics of good seed
• Have high market value
• Genetically pure
Seed types and characteristics
Seed Type Characteristics Genetic Purity Tag Colour
Nucleus Seed Produced by the breeder and it is genetically pure 100% -
seed
Breeder Seed Produced by the breeder from nucleus seed 100% Yellow
Foundation Seed Produced by the breeder seed under the supervi- 99.5% White
sion of the concerned seed certification agency
Certified Seed Certified seed is the progeny of foundation seed 99.0% Azar Blue
and its production is supervised and approved by
certification agency.
The seed of this class is normally produced by the
State and National Seeds Corporation and Private
Seed Companies on the farms of progressive grow-
ers.
This is the commercial seed which is available to
the farmers.
21
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Seed treatment Seed pelleting: The most sophisticated Seed
Treatment Technology changes the physical shape
Seed treatment is usages of specific products and spe-
of a seed to enhance pelletability and handling. Pel-
cific techniques to improve the growth environment
leting requires specialized application machinery
for the seed, seedlings and young plants. It ranges
and techniques and is the most expensive applica-
from a basic dressing to coating and pelleting.
tion.
Seed dressing: This is the most common method
The farmer must take care of the fol-
of seed treatment. The seed is dressed with either a
lowing while buying the seeds
dry formulation or wet treated with a slurry or liq-
uid formulation. Dressings can be applied at both,
• When purchasing the seed farmer should ob-
the farm and industries. Low cost earthen pots can
tain a bill/cash memo wherein the lot number
be used for mixing pesticides with seed or seed can
and seed tag number is mentioned.
be spread on a polythene sheet. The required quan-
• After purchasing the seed, empty bag/packet
tity of chemical can be sprinkled on the seed lot and
(pouches) and receipt should be kept safely.
mixed mechanically by the farmers.
• Out of purchased seed, 100 seeds are taken from
Seed coating: A special binder is used with a for- each purchased variety to test them for germi-
nation before sowing in the field. Knowing the
mulation to enhance adherence to the seed.
germination percentage, the farmer can decide
the seed rate when sowing in the field.
Seed Dressing Pelleted Onion Seed
Recommendation of seed treatment for different crops contiued...
Name of Crop Pest / Disease Seed Treatment Remarks
Sugarcane Root rot, wilt Trichoderma spp. 4-6 gm/kg seed For seed dress-
ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
ern pots or
polythene bags
are used.
Rice Root rot disease Trichoderma 5-10 gm/kg seed (before For seed dress-
transplanting) ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
other insects /pests Pseudomonas flourescens 0.5% W.P. 10
ern pots or
gm/kg.
Bacterial sheath blight polythene bags
are used.
22
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Recommendation of seed treatment for different crops contiued...
Name of Crop Pest / Disease Seed Treatment Remarks
Chillies Anthracnose spp. Seed treatment with Trichoderma viride For seed dress-
Damping off 4g/kg ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
Soil borne infection of Trichoderma viride @ 2 gm/kg. seed and
ern pots or
fungal disease Pseudomonas flourescens@10gm/kg Cap-
polythene bags
tan 75 WS @ 1.5 to 2.5 gm a.i./litre for soil
are used.
drenching.
Jassid, aphid, thrips Imidacloprid 70 WS @ 10-15 gm a.i./kg
seed (To be used in proper doses under
guidance of an agriculture expert)
Pigeon pea Wilt, Blight and Root Trichoderma spp. @ 4 gm/kg. Seed For seed dress-
rot ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
ern pots or
polythene bags
are used.
Pea Root rot Seed treatment with For seed dress-
1. Bacillus subtilis ing metal seed
2. Pseudomonas fluorescens dresser/earth-
ern pots or
White rot Soil application @ 2.5 – 5 kg in 100kg FYM
polythene bags
are used.
Bhendi Root knot nematode Paecilomyces lilacinus and Pseudomonas For seed dress-
fluorescens @ 10 gm/kg as seed dresser. ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
ern pots or
polythene bags
are used.
Tomato Soil borne infection of T. viride @ 2 gm/100gm seed. For seed dress-
fungal disease ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
Early blight Pseudomonas fluorescens and V. clamydo-
ern pots or
sporium @ 10gm/kg as seed dresser.
Damping off polythene bags
are used.
Wilt
Sunflower Seed rot Trichoderma viride @ 6 gm/kg seed. For seed dress-
ing metal seed
Jassids, Imidacloprid 48FS @ 5-9 gm a.i. per kg.
dresser/earth-
Seed (To be used in proper doses under
ern pots or
guidance of an agriculture expert)
polythene bags
Whitefly
are used.
Imidacloprid 70WS @ 7 gm a.i. per kg.
Seed (To be used in proper doses under
guidance of an agriculture expert)
23
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.8. Cropping systems Alley cropping
Farmers resort to cultivation of a number of crops Is an agroforestry practice in which perennial, pref-
and rotate particular crop combinations. More erably leguminous, trees or shrubs are grown simul-
than 250 cropping systems are being followed in In- taneously with an arable crop. The trees, managed as
dia, of which 30 cropping systems are more preva- hedgerows, are grown in wide rows and the crop is
lent. Some of the important cropping systems are: planted in the interspace or ‘alley’ between the tree
rows.
1. Sequential cropping system:
During the cropping phase, the trees are pruned.
Growing crops in sequence within a crop year, one Prunings are used as green manure or mulch on the
crop being sown after the harvest of the other. For crop to improve the organic matter status of the soil
example, rice followed by pigeonpea, pigeonpea fol- and to provide nutrients, particularly nitrogen, to
lowed by wheat. the crop.
2. Intercropping System:
Growing more than one crop in the same area in
rows of definite proportion and pattern.
Alley Cropping and Silvipasture
a. Season based cropping system
i. Kharif rice based cropping system
ii. Kharif maize based cropping system
iii. Kharif sorghum based cropping system
iv. Kharif millet based cropping system
v. Kharif groundnut based cropping system
vi. Winter wheat and chickpea based crop
ping system
vii. Rabi sorghum based cropping system
b. Mixed cropping
Cereals + Legumes In order to minimise the risk and uncertainty of
mono cropping and to have sustainable yield and
income, farmers are advised to go for mixed crop-
The following intercropping practices
ping.
were found to be remunerative in India’s
groundnut growing states.
State Crop combination
Maharashtra Groundnut + Red gram (6:1/4:1)
Groundnut + Soybean (6:2)
Groundnut + Sunflower (6:2/3:1)
Gujarat Groundnut + Castor (9:2/3:1)
Groundnut + Sunflower (3:1/2:1)
Groundnut + Red gram (4:1)
Mixed Cropping
24
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Integrated farming System (IFS) • Self sustainability
• Less dependence on external resources
To feed ever-increasing population of the country,
extensive cropping system give ways to intensive Crop production in IFS
cropping which are exploiting natural resources. • Food crop should find a place
Therefore in future more thrust will be on efficient • Family food requirement should be planned
natural resource management and sustainable pro- • Fodder production to meet the demand of ani-
duction system. This encompasses an animal com- mal component
ponent, an perennial and annual crop component, • Specific enterprise based crops; e.g. mulberry/
aqua culture, agro based production and processing sunflower linked to honey
units. Integrated farming system typically involves: • Infrastructure based cropping
• Sufficient employment to family members
• Many enterprises including animal component
• Planning is based on resource available Animal component in IFS
• It is purely location specific/farmer/holding
• One or more animal components or combina-
specific activity plan
tion of animal component may be planned
• Very high resource use efficiency
• Complimentary enterprises should be identi-
• Sustainable farming
fied
• Composting should be the interface between
animal and crop enterprises
• Market should be considered before hand
• Need based demand driven enterprises should
be prioritized
Allocation of resource in IFS
• List the resources available and required
• Prioritize the resources based on scarcity
• Resource demand will be prioritized based on
IFS - Duck & Fish rearing economic impact and sustainability
• Scares resource on the farm should be allocated
Objectives of IFS for the most important activity
• To compliment and maximize use of by prod- • Recycling of resources should be planned
ucts • Resource based contingent plan should be pre-
• To provide useful employment to all the family pared in advance. This will serve as a security
members and sustainable alternative in case of crisis
• Maximizing land use
• Value addition
Crops, Trees, Shrubs
Irrigation Feed
Pond Family Livestock
Effluent Manure
Biodigestor
25
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.9. Mechanization Selection of farm machinery
Modernization of agriculture requires appro- • Select based on holding size
priate machinery for ensuring timely field • Economic feasibility
operations, effective application of agricultural in- • Availability of skilled labour to operate
puts and reducing drudgery in agriculture. • Workout the feasibility of hiring v/s owning
• Decide between universal equipment v/s crop
Advantages of mechanization
specific equipment when multiple crops are
grown
• Increase cropping intensity
• If the initial investment is huge, think of com-
• Ensure large area coverage and timeliness
munity ownership/custom hire centres, etc.
• Increasing farm labour productivity
• Increases crop productivity and profitability Benefits of Agricultural Mechanization
First step in mechanization Benefits Value, %
• Get good hands on training Saving in seed 15-20
• Read manufacturer information
Saving in fertilizer 15-20
• Give attention to maintenance
Saving in time 20-30
• Understand do’s and don’ts with respect to
equipments and machinery used
Reduction in labours 20-30
• Take utmost care in following safety tips given
Increase in cropping intensity 5-20
in the manufacture information booklet.
Higher productivity 10-15
Substantial reduction in drudgery of farm
workers especially that of women
Farm Mechanisation Potential
Land Preparation
Wooden Plunk Bullock Drawn Country Plough
Laser Guided Land Leveller Field Operation of Tractor Drawn Disc Plough
26
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Seeding and Planting Machinery
CRIDA 2 Row Planter Seed Treating Drum
Field of Operation of Yanji Transplanter for SRI Tractor Drawn CRIDA 9 Row Planter
Inter-Cultivation Equipments
Cono Weeder
Weeding under wetland paddy cultivation
Grubber Weeder
Cost savings of up to 60% are possible at the early stages of
crop growth.
Tractor – Operated Cotton Weeder
Wheel Hoe B.D. 3 Tyne Cultivator
Reduces the cost of weeding up to 50%
27
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Plant Protection Equipments
Knapsack Power Sprayer
Tree Sprayer
Blower Sprayer
Power Tiller Mounted Sprayer
Harvesting Equipments
Groundnut Digger
Coconut Tree Climber
• Used for picking of coconuts
• Average time taken for climbing up and down is about
6.30 min for a 13 m tree and time for fixing and remov-
ing the device on the tree is 4 minutes.
Banana Clump Remover
Austoft Chopper Harvester Cotton Stalk Puller
28
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Threshing Equipments
Groundnut Pod Stripper Castor Sheller
Winnowing and Clearing Equipments
Winnowing Fan Seed Cleaner
29
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
1.10. Good Agricultural Practices GAP related to crop protection
(GAP)
• Use resistant cultivars and varieties.
• Crop sequences, associations and cultural prac-
Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) are "prac-
tices.
tices that address environmental, economic and
• Biological prevention of pests and diseases.
social sustainability for on-farm processes, and which
• Maintain regular and quantitative assessment
result in safe and quality food and non-food agricul-
of the balance status between pests and diseases
tural products".
and beneficial organisms of all crops.
• Adopt organic control practices where and
What are GAP codes, standards and
when applicable.
regulations? • Apply pest and disease forecasting techniques
where available.
Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) codes, stand-
• Determine interventions following considera-
ards and regulations are guidelines which have
tion of all possible methods and their short and
been developed in recent years by the food industry,
long-term effects on farm productivity and en-
producers' organizations, governments and NGOs
vironmental implications. This will allow the
aiming to codify agricultural practices at farm level
minimizing of agrochemicals, in particular, to
for a range of commodities.
promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM).
• Store and use agrochemicals according to le-
Why do GAP codes, standards and gal requirements of registration for individual
regulations exist? crops, rates, timings, and pre-harvest intervals
• Ensure that agrochemicals are only applied by
These GAP codes, programmes or standards exist specially trained and knowledgeable persons.
because of: • Ensure that equipment used for the handling
and application of agrochemicals complies with
• Growing concerns about food quality and safe-
established safety and maintenance standards.
ty worldwide.
• Maintain accurate records of agrochemical use.
• Fulfilment of trade and government regulatory
• Identify the GAP in each protection method.
requirements.
• Specific requirements especially for niche mar- Crop rotation systems
kets.
• Sequence crops by selecting pest host relation.
• Selected crop for rotation in order to break the
Objectives
life cycle of pest (Jowar should be rotated with
• Ensuring safety and quality of produce in the
pulses to combat striga weed).
food chain.
• The selected crop for rotation should not be the
• Capturing new market advantages by modify-
food of previous crop pest.
ing supply chain governance.
• To select appropriate crops for rotation:
• Improving natural resources used, workers'
• Analyze the pest habitat
health and working conditions to creating new
• Follow forecasts
market opportunities for farmers and exporters
• Monitor pest and natural enemies
in developing countries.
Privilege resistant species
The benefits of GAP codes
• Cultivate plant varieties which are less prone to
• Standards and regulations are numerous, in-
pest attack.
cluding food quality and safety improvement.
• The resistant varieties reduce production cost.
• Facilitation of market access.
• Pest resistant transgenic crops developed for
• Reduction in non-compliance risks regarding
specific pest can be used. This is new avenue for
permitted pesticides, Maximum Residue Limits
reducing pesticide load.
(MRLs) and other contamination hazards.
30
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Seeding techniques
1.10. Lessons Learnt
• Depth of placement
• Method of placement
1. Critical factors to be considered while de-
• Time of placement
ciding the crops and cropping pattern are
• Seed treatments
climatic factors, soil conservation, water,
• Managing the above based on pest nature will
cropping system options, past and present
give good results
experiences of farmers, expected profit
Promote useful animals and risk, economic conditions of farmers
including land holding, labour availability,
• Keep good predator population.
mechanization potential technology avail-
• Promote growth of beneficial insects.
ability and suitability, demand and avail-
• Create an environment congenial for predators;
ability of market policies and schemes,
e.g. keeping bird perch in the field.
public and private extension influence,
• Identify the useful animals and study their hab-
availability of required agricultural inputs
itat for providing the required environment.
including agricultural credit and post har-
Observe and control populations vest storage and processing technologies.
• Follow forecast-short term and long term. 2. Soil, water and wind erosion may be man-
• Study habitat of pest and congenial weather. aged through various recommended prac-
• Accordingly take necessary precautions to tices.
manage pest. 3. Method of irrigation has to be decided
considering the quantity of water available
Give priority to mechanical and biological
and crop to be grown.
measures (instead of chemical) 4. Recommended certified seeds may be
• Get the full knowledge about botanical pesti- used.
cides. 5. Mechanisation enhances quality of agri-
• Get the knowledge on available parasites and cultural operations and minimises the cost
predator/friendly insects and pests. and dependence on labour.
• Accordingly develop action plan for mechani- 6. Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) may
cal and biological measures. be considered essentials to enhance the
price and market competitiveness of the
• Use non cash inputs: Saves money.
produce.
• Use information on plant protection: Analyze
spatial and temporal distribution and trend
analysis.
Monitoring of performance through taking
notes each year/season.
• Keep the pest management record along with
season, weather and other agriculture activity.
• Document the pest load and control achieved
• Use this experience for future planning.
Precision farming: Use precision farming mod-
ules and apply Information Technology (IT) to
economize and for effective monitoring.
Good Agriculture Practices help the farmers to make
use of the opportunities available in International
Markets for selling their products and realising bet-
ter farm profits.
31
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
2. Soil and Plant Nutrition
2.1. Objectives of the session
• To increase the awareness and understanding about the soil, its structure, physical, chemical and bio-
logical properties and soil fertility.
• To strengthen the farmer’s knowledge to manage the soil fertility in an economically and environmen-
tally sustainable manner.
2.2. What we know at the end of the session
• Soil composition
• Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of soil
• Soil testing
• Plant nutrition requirement
• Organic and inorganic fertilizers
• Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) for efficient, economic and sustainable production
Know your Soil physical factors: parent material, time, climate, or-
ganisms present and topography. The way in which
we manage soil is another major factor influencing
2.3. What is Soil?
the character of the soil.
Soil is a thin layer of earth’s crust, which serves as
natural medium for the growth of plants. Rocks
are the important sources for the parent materials
over which soils are developed. 25% Air
45% Mineral
Soil Constituents
25% Water
5%
OM
Soil Constituents
Soil features, properties and their im-
portance
Rocks, the source of parent matererial
Soil is a dynamic medium made up of minerals, or-
ganic matter, water, air and living creatures includ-
ing bacteria and earthworms.
Soil features and properties
It was formed and is forever changing due to 5 major
33
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Soil colour
• Dark colour indicates usually medium to high
fertility due to high amount of organic matter.
These soils have usually high amount of nutri-
ents, good water holding capacity and structure
and are well aerated.
• Light colour indicates medium to low fertil-
ity. These soils may have leaching issue (water
makes organic matter and other nutrients move Soil
downward faster).
Soil depth Soil texture
• The depth of soil to which the roots of a plant • Texture refers to relative proportion of miner-
can readily penetrate to in order to reach water al particles (sand, silt, and clay) in soil. Many
and nutrients. properties of soils; e.g. drainage, water holding
• Minimum of 3-5 feet is desirable, deeper soils capacity, aeration and the nutrient availability;
are better because they can hold more nutrients depend largely on soil texture.
and water. • Sandy: Low fertility and water holding capacity
but good aeration.
• Loamy: Medium fertility and good aeration.
• Clayey: High fertility and poor aeration, hard
to plough.
Soil Constituents
• Farmers may refer to their soil as heavy or light,
illustrating the ease of working. The heavy soils
are usually hard to plough and require much
more effort than light soils. Organic matter may
Soil Depth
be added to improve the soil texture.
34
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Land slope
• Soil gradient is the angle of inclination of the soil surface from the soil.
• It is expressed in percentage, which is the number of feet raise or fall in 100 feet from the horizontal
distance.
• Mild gradient up to 1% is desirable.
• Higher gradients are not desirable as it leads to soil and water erosion.
• Perfect levelling is required only for paddy crop.
1
nt
4 5 P
erce 1
2 5 P e rc e n t 1
15
Percent G 1round
Surface
Gentle to
moderately
gentle
slopes
8.50
5 Percent
1
Nearly Flat to very gentle slopes 30
1 2.2 4 6.7 20
h=Horizontal distance
Land Slope
Soil pH Tips for soil pH management
• Acid soils are to be corrected by using lime,
• Soil pH is of utmost importance in plant growth
quantity of lime application is as per soil test
as it influences nutrient availability, toxicities
report.
and the activity of soil organisms.
• Alkali soils are to be corrected by gypsum/sul-
phur, quantity of application is as per soil test
PH Range Soil Reaction Rating report.
• Saline – alkali soils should be treated with gyp-
<4.6 Extremely acid
sum and improved drainage.
4.6-5.5 Strongly acid
Soil organic matter
5.6-6.5 Moderately acid
• Soil organic matter is the mix of plant and ani-
6.6-6.9 Slightly acid
mal matter in different stages of decay.
7.0 Neutral
• Soil organic matter plays a key role in biologi-
7.1-8.5 Moderately alkaline cal, physical, and chemical function in soil.
>8.5 Strongly alkaline Soil organic matter helps by:
• Providing nutrients for soil organisms
• Acting as major reservoir of plant nutrients
Acid pH Acid pH
OH- • Making nutrient exchange between soil and
H+
root of the plants easier
7 Neutral pH 7 • Improving soil structure
H+ OH-
0 14 0 14 • Influencing soil temperature
• Reducing the risk of soil erosion
7
Basic pH H+ Basic pH • Increasing water holding capacity
0 14
Soil organic matter can be improved
7
7 through:
0 14 0 14 • Recycling the crop residue back to field
without wasting and burning
• Applying compost
35
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
esir
lacitreV
- v
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Very Very
Medium Slightly Slightly Medium
Strongly acid slightly slightly Strongly alkaline
acid acid alkaline alkaline
acid alkaline
nitrogen
phosphorus
potassium
sulphur
calcium
magnesium
iron
manganese
boron
copper & zinc
molybdenum
4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10
Effect of Soil pH on Nutrient Availability
• Applying various organic manures and approach extension officials for further guid-
• Mulching organic wastes ance.
• Using green manures and cover crops
• Suitable crop rotation
Soil EC(mS/ Crop reaction
• Reducing soil tillage
cm)
• Avoiding soil erosion
Salt free 0 - 2 Salinity effect negli-
gible, except for more
Carbon - Nitrogen Ratio (C:N Ratio)
sensitive crops
There are chemical elements in the organic matter, Slightly 4 - 8 Yield of many crops
which are extremely important, especially in their saline restricted
relation or proportion to each other. They are Car- Moderately 8 - 15 Only tolerant crops
bon and Nitrogen. The relationship is called Car- saline yield satisfactorily
bon - Nitrogen Ratio (C:N Ratio). For example,
Highly saline > 15 Only very tolerant
composed manure has 20:1 and sawdust has 400:1
crops yield satisfacto-
of carbon and nitrogen. Generally speaking, the
rily
legumes are highest in nitrogen and have low C:N
Ratio, which is highly desirable. Farmers can use
blood meal, bone meal, poultry manure, cottonseed Soil fertility
meal and soybean meal and other nitrogen rich ma-
• Soil fertility is generally defined as “ability of
terial as organic matter, which enhance the decom-
soil to supply plant nutrients”. Soil structure,
position.
soil texture, temperature, water, light and air
Electrical Conductivity (EC): EC is normally consid- also play an important role in maintaining soil
ered to be a measurement of the dissolved salts in a fertility.
solution. • Plant nutrients which are often scarce in soil
are nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus since
General interpretation of EC values
plants use large amounts for their growth and
Through application of zypsum, the saline/sodic
survival.
soils can be amended. The quantity of zypsum to
• Important nutrients, their function and defi-
be applied is decided by EC value. Farmers having
ciency symptoms are described below.
problem of saline/sodic soils can go for soil testing
36
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
2.4. Deficiency Symptoms of Nutrients in Plants
Nitrogen (N) – deficiency symptoms
1. Stunted growth.
2. Appearance of light green to pale-yellow col-
our on the older leaves, starting from the tips.
This is followed by death and/or dropping of
the older leaves depending upon the degree
of deficiency.
3. In acute deficiency, flowering is greatly re-
duced.
4. Lower protein content.
Nitrogen (N) – deficiency symptoms
Phosphorous (P) – deficiency
symptoms
1. Overall stunted appearance, the mature
leaves have characteristic dark to blue-green
colouration, restricted root development.
2. In acute deficiency, occasional purpling of
leaves and stems; spindly growth.
3. Delayed maturity and poor seed and fruit de-
velopment.
Phosphorous (P) – deficiency symptoms
Potassium (K) – deficiency
symptoms
1. Chlorosis along the leaf margins followed
by scorching and browning of tips of older
leaves. These symptoms then gradually
progress inwards.
2. Slow and stunted growth of plants.
3. Stalks weaken and plant lodge easily.
4. Shrivelled seeds of fruits.
Potassium (K) – deficiency symptoms
37
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Calcium (Ca) – deficiency symptoms
1. Calcium deficiencies are not seen in the field
because secondary effects associated with
high acidity limit growth.
2. The young leaves of new plants are affected
first. These are often distorted, small and ab-
normally dark green.
3. Leaves may be cup-shaped and crinkled and
the terminal buds deteriorate with some
breakdown of petioles.
4. Root growth is markedly impaired; rooting of
roots occurs.
5. Dessication of growing points (terminal
buds) of plants under severe deficiency.
6. Buds and blossoms shed prematurely.
Calcium (Ca) – deficiency symptoms
7. Stem structure weakened.
Magnesium (Mg) – deficiency
symptoms
1. Interveinal chlorosis, mainly of older leaves,
producing a streaked or patchy effect; with
acute deficiency, the affected tissue may dry
up and die.
2. Leaves usually small, brittle in final stages
and curve upwards at margin.
3. In some vegetable plants, chlorotic spot be-
tween veins, with tints of orange, red and
purple.
4. Twigs weak and prone to fungus attack, usu-
ally premature, leaf drop.
Magnesium (Mg) – deficiency symptoms
Sulphur (S) deficiency symptoms
1. Younger leaves turn uniformly yellowish
green or chlorotic.
2. Root growth is restricted, flower production
often indeterminate.
3. Stems are stiff, woody and small in diameter.
Sulphur (S) deficiency symptoms
38
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Zinc (Zn) deficiency symptoms
1. Deficiency symptoms mostly appear on the
2nd or 3rd fully mature leaves from the top
of plants.
2. In maize, from light yellow striping to a broad
band of white or yellow tissue with reddish
purple veins between the midrib and edges
of the leaf, occurring mainly in the lower half
of the leaf.
3. In wheat, a longitudinal band of white or yel-
low leaf tissue, followed by interveinal chlo-
rotic mottling and white to brown necrotic
lesions in the middle of the leaf blade; even-
tual collapse of the affected leaves near the
middle.
4. In rice, after 15-20 days of transplanting,
small scattered light yellow spots appear on
the older leaves which later enlarge, coalesce
Zinc (Zn) deficiency symptoms
and turn deep brown, the entire leaf becomes
rust-brown in colour and dries out within a
month.
5. In citrus, irregular interveinal chlorosis; ter-
minal leaves become small and barrowed
(little-leaf); fruit-bud formation is severely
reduced, twigs die back plants.
Copper (Cu) - deficiency symptoms
1. In cereals, yellowing and curling of the leaf
blades, restricted ear production and poor
grain set, indeterminate tillering.
2. In citrus, die back of new growth; exanthema
pockets of gum develop between the bark
and the weed; the fruit shows brown spots.
Copper (Cu) - deficiency symptoms
Iron (Fe) - deficiency symptoms
1. Typical interveinal chlorosls; youngest leaves
first affected, points and margins of leaves
keep their green colour longest.
2. In severe case, the entire leaf, veins and in-
terveinal area turn yellow and may eventually
become bleached.
Iron (Fe) - deficiency symptoms
39
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Boron (B) - deficiency symptoms
1. Death of growing plants (shoot tips).
2. The leaves have a thick texture, sometimes
curling and becoming brittle.
3. Flowers do not form and root growth is
stunted.
4. “Brown heart” in root crops characterized by
dark spots on the thickest part of the root or
splitting at centre.
Boron (B) - deficiency symptoms
Manganese (Mn) - deficiency
symptoms
1. Chlorosis between the veins of young leaves,
characterized by the appearance of chlorotic
and necrotic spots in the interveinal areas.
2. Greyish areas appear near the base of the
younger leaves and become yellowish to yel-
low orange.
3. Symptoms of deficiency popularly known in
sugarcane as “streak” disease.
Manganese (Mn) - deficiency symptoms
Molybdenum (Mo) - deficiency
symptoms
1. Chlorotic interveinal mottling of the lower
leaves, followed by marginal necrosis and in
folding of the leaves.
2. In cauliflower, the leaf tissues wither leaving
only the midrib and a few small pieces of leaf
blade (“whiptail”).
3. Molybdenum deficiency is markedly evident
in leguminous plants.
Molybdenum (Mo) - deficiency symptoms
40
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Some common deficiency symptoms are:
Chlorosis - It is the loss of chlorophyll leading
to yellowing in leaves. It is caused by the defi-
ciency of elements like K, Mg, N, S, Fe, Mn, Zn
and Mo.
Necrosis are death of tissues, particularly leaf
tissue is caused by deficiency of K, Ca, Mg
Inhibition of cell division is caused due to lack or deficiency of N, K, S and Mo.
Premature fall of leaves and buds
• deficiency of K and P.
41
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Stunted/Retarded plant growth caused
by the deficiency of N, P, K, Zn, Ca.
Delay in flowering due to deficiency of N, S
and Mo.
In case the farmers observe the above symptoms, farmers are advised to consult the local extension worker
for remedies.
42
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
2.5. Different fertilizers and their
nutrient content
A. Soil Analysis: Key to a Successful
Important chemical fertilizers are the source of
Nutrient Management Plan
major nutrients. Different fertilizers and their
nutrient content are illustrated in the table below:
Higher crop yields and quality of
the crops depend largely on the ef-
Fertilizer Nutrient content (%)
ficient supply of nutrients. Soil provides
N P* K not only the medium but also functions
as the source of these nutrients for the
Single nutrient fertilizers
plants. Soil resources get depleted with
Ammonium sulphate 20 0 0
every harvest and need to be replenished
Urea 46 0 0 for every crop. However, one must know
which nutrients are to what extent deplet-
Calcium ammonium nitrate1 28 0 0
ed and what addition of fertilizers should
Single super phosphate 0 7 0 be planned accordingly. Soil analysis, in
this regard, helps in determining the level
Triple Super Phosphate 0 20 0
of nutrients and in deciding the required
Potassium sulphate 0 0 40 amount of fertilizer application.
Muriate of Potash2 0 0 48
Accuracy of soil analysis is directly relat-
Double fertilizers ed to the quality of the soil sample taken.
Application of appropriate fertilizers with
Ammonium Phosphate 11 23 0
the proper nutrient mix will help not only
Diammonium Phosphate3 18 20 0 to increase the productivity and farm in-
come but also provide a more realistic
Complete Fertilizers
chance to obtain the desired yield. There
Sampurna4 19 19 19 are various methods for taking a soil sam-
ple from a field. The right method of sam-
Vijaya Complex5 17 17 17
pling may be decided by consulting local
IFFCO Grade I6 10 26 26 extension officer or your DESAI-trainer.
1Calcium ammonium nitrate- To be used with caution. Soil Sampling Methods
2Muriate of Potash- To be used with caution and protective equipment (Respirator)
3Diammonium Phosphate- To be used with caution.
4Sampurna- Compilation Source- Manufacturer (Zuari Agro Chemicals).
5Vijaya Complex- Indigenous Complex Fertilizer.
6 IFFCO Grade I- Compilation Source- Manufacturer
(To be used with caution.)
43
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
gro.tasirci
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Soil sampling: an illustration
Selecting sampling spot Remove the surface litter at the Make a ‘V’ shaped cut to a depth
sampling spot of 15 cm in the sampling spot
Collect soils - V shaped cut: Mix the samples thoroughly
Remove thick slices of soil from top to bottom of exposed face of the
‘V’ shaped cut and place in a clean container
Quartering is done by dividing Two opposite quarters are dis- Collect the sample in a clean
the thoroughly mixed sample carded and the remaining is cloth or polythene bag
into four equal parts mixed
Process of collection Label with required information: Places for soil testing:
• Name of the farmer • Krishi Vigyan Kendra
• Location of the farm (KVK)
• Survey number • State/district agricultural
• Previous crop grown, pre- labs
sent crop • Agriculture University, Re-
• Crop to be grown in the next search Stations
season • ATMA Officials/Agri-
• Date of collection preneurs
• Name of the sampler, etc
44
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
B. Plant Analysis through Electrical Conductivity (EC).
• Relative proportion of sodium to other cations
Plant Analysis is the second tool, after soil test-
such as Ca and Mg are referred to as Sodium
ing that is critical to improve crop nutrition and
Adsorption Ratio (SAR).
yield. Only plant analysis can identify the actual
• Concentration of boron or other elements that
nutrient status of a plant or crop. While soil testing
may be toxic to plants.
identifies the nutrients offered to the crop or plants,
• Concentration of carbonates and bi-carbonate
Plant analysis identifies how well the plants utilizes
as related to the concentration of calcium plus
the soil nutrients and applied nutrients. Plant analy-
magnesium are referred to as Residual Sodium
sis allows the plant to tell us what nutrients it needs.
Carbonate (RSC).
• Content of anions such as chloride, sulphate
It is critical that the correct plant part and stage of
and nitrate.
growth be sampled. The normal nutrient concentra-
tion differs between the various plant parts. Also,
Methods of water sample collection
the normal nutrient concentration of each plant
As water quality and suitability plays an important
part changes as the plant matures. It is important
role in deciding production and productivity of
to keep these factors in mind to assess the nutrients
crops, farmers are advised consult extension worker
status of plants. The plant parts required to be col-
to test the water.
lected for different crops are as follows.
Nutrient re-
Crop Growth stage Plant part to be sampled Quantity
quirement and
Cotton (a) Seedling, 6” to 12” Entire above ground portion 15 –20 plants productivity
tall of plant.
Keeping soil
(b) Prior to or at first
fertility and
Youngest fully mature leaves
bloom
soil nutrients
from the main stem of plant. 15 – 20 leaves
(c) When first squares at optimum
Discard the petioles.
appear level helps in-
Sugar Cane 2 Months to mature Second fully mature leaf 15 to 25 leaves creasing the
without sheath. productiv-
ity of the soil.
Sunflower (a) Seedling stage Entire above ground portion 15 to 20 plants
Although the
of plant.
ability of the
(b) Vegetative to full Youngest fully mature leaf. 15 to 20 leaves
soil to supply
bloom No petiole.
the plants with
the required
C. Irrigation Water Analysis nutrients depends also on the soil condition like i.e.
soil texture, soil structure and soil organic matter.
Irrigation water, irrespective of its source, always Therefore, soil fertility management does not only
contains some soluble salts. The suitability of wa- include nutrient management but also soil condi-
ters for a specific purpose depends upon the types tion management.
and amounts of dissolved salts. Some of the dis-
Apart from other soil management practices,
solved salts or other constituents may be useful for
crops but the quality or suitability of water for irri- soil fertility focuses on:
gation purposes is assessed in terms of the presence • Maintain a balance between nutrient uptake
of undesirable constituents. Some of the dissolved and nutrient application.
ions such as NO3 are useful for crops. • Adequate fertility for the plants at the specific
growth stages.
The most important characteristic that de-
• Soil fertility and organic matter maintenance
termine the quality of irrigation water are:
• Minimizing the nutrient loss by avoiding excess
• pH application.
• Total concentration of soluble salts are judged
45
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
The soil nutrient demand usually is based on: General considerations before fertilizer applica-
• Soil nutrient level tion:
• Crop variety and yielding ability • Nutrients and not fertilizers should be bought.
• Soil moisture (Think nutrients, not fertilizers).
• Targeted yield • Each nutrient applied as fertilizer should give a
desired production response.
Soil analysis direct the farmer on quantity and qual-
• The cost of fertilization must be calculated on
ity of fertilisers to be used. Farmers can get the crop
the basis of applied plant nutrients per unit area
specific nutrient (fertilizer) recommendations af-
of land.
ter consulting the local extension service or their
• Calculate one nutrient at a time, considering
DESAI-trainer and discussing with them the soil
available sources, prices and feasibility of using.
analysis report.
• A sample Soil Health Card, issued to the farm-
ers based on the soil test results, should be used
C. Recommended Fertilizer Dose for
by the farmer to calculate the quantities of fer-
Important Crops
tilizers required:
N (kgs/ P2 O5 K2O Remarks
ha) (kgs/ha (kgs/ha
Banana 110 35 330 Apply 50% extra fertilizers at 2nd , 4th, 6th & 8th
months after planting for tissue culture banana
Cotton 120 60 60 (TCHB – 213)
Citrus (sweet 0.6 kgs 0.2 kgs 0.3 kgs From 6th year onwards
orange)
Mango 1.0 kg 1.0 kg 1.5 kg Kg of NPK/tree for 6th year onwards
Sugar cane 275 - 112.5
Sun flower 60 90 60 Irrigated Hybrid
40 50 40 Rainfed/Varieties
If the samples are all above the critical
level, there is no deficiency of any ele-
ment.
Nutrient SL, SCL CL
Zn 0.65 0.70
Cu 0.20 0.30
Fe 4.00 6.00
Mn 2.00 3.00
Fertilizers: Chemical or Organic
Chemical fertilizers
Advantages:
• Nutrients are immediately avail-
able for plant uptake.
• Price is lower as compared to or-
ganic fertilizer.
• Small quantities are required be-
cause they are nutrient rich.
46
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Disadvantages: Fertilizer application methods
• Over application usually results in economic
and environmental losses. Broadcasting: fertilizer is distributed manually
• Over supply makes plant tissues soft and vul- over the cropped field.
nerable to diseases and pathogens. • The most common fertilizer application
• Increased rate of soil organic matter decompo- method.
sition resulting in soil degradation. • Highly inefficient method
• Many nutrients applied are easily lost through • High economic and nutrient losses
different chemical reactions.
Organic fertilizers
Advantages:
• Balanced nutrient supply.
• Enhance the soil biological activity.
• Help in improving soil structure.
• Increase the organic matter content.
• Slow release of nutrients makes soil on the long
run fertile.
• Help in combating plant diseases.
Broadcasting
Disadvantages
• Low nutrient content. Placement: application in band or packets near
• Only effective in the long run.
the plants.
• It may not supply all the nutrients required for
• Two sub-types:
plant growth.
i. Band application
• High cost.
ii. Spot Application
• Bulkiness.
• The fertilizer use efficiency is high.
• Labour intensive.
Efficient fertilizer use
Good knowledge and management practices can • Efficient method but with high labour input.
improve the fertilizer use efficiency.
• Select the crops and varieties that suit the local-
ity and have best fertilizer response.
• Select right kind of fertilizer according to crop
and soil.
• The fertilization should be planned for the
cropping pattern and not for single crops.
• Fertilization application rate should be decided
only after discussing your soil analysis report
with your local extension officer or Desai-
Trainer.
• Balanced fertilization should be practiced.
• Crops should only be sown at the locally rec-
ommended periods.
• Maintain optimum plant population and prop-
er plant spacing.
• Effective control of pests and diseases will help
in maximizing the fertilizer efficiency.
• To maximize the yield increase through ferti-
Placement
lizer, all other growth critical factors must also
be optimum e.g. crop must be irrigated at criti-
cal growth stages.
47
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Ring application: Spread the fertilizer around • Use slow release nitrogen for plantation crops
the tree at a distance of about one meter. and long duration crops.
• Under puddle condition, use coated urea-neem
oil. Coal tar sulphur coating will make urea to
release nitrogen slow to match the uptake pat-
tern.
• Urea can be cured with soil (1 part urea with
5-10 parts soil) to reduce the losses.
• Phosphate should be placed 4 to 6 cm below
and 4 to 6 cm away from the seeds to ensure
maximum availability.
• Phosphatic fertilizers give better response when
Ring Application
placed in bands near the plant rows.
• Potassic fertilizers can be applied in one dose
Foliar application: liquid fertilizers are sprayed
as basal application but for long duration crops
on the crops.
the fertilizer application may be done in 2 to 3
splits.
Fertilizer calculations
Here is an example for the application of fertilizers
based on the soil test recommendations. Suppose
the recommendations are 120 kg N, 60 Kg P and 40
Kg K per ha. Calculate the quantity of urea, super-
phosphate and muriate of potash fertilizers needed
to supply the recommended doses!
Foliar Application
Urea content is 46%, so to supply 46 kg N/ha
100 kg urea is required. To supply 120 kg N/ha
• Highly efficient
100/46*120=260.9 or 261 kg urea is required. Simi-
• Special equipment required
larly super phosphate content is 16% P2O5 and the
• High cost
recommendation is given in the form of Phospho-
• Only selected fertilizers can be applied
rous.
Fertigation along with irrigation
• % P = %P2O5 X 0.44
• Kg P = kg P2O5 X 0.44
• Kg P = 16 X 0.44
• Kg P = 7.04
So super phosphate contains 7.04 P and the recom-
mendation is given as 60 kg P.
To supply 60 kg P=100/7.04*60=852.27 or 852 kg
single super phosphate is required. Similarly, we
Fertigation
have to calculate the dose of potash through Muri-
Method of application and nutrients ate of Potash (MOP) as MOP contains 60% K2O.
The method of application should be chosen ac-
So MOP contains 49.8 K and the recommendation
cording to the nutrient, crop, soil and cultivation
given is 40 kg K/ha.
method.
To supply 40 kg K=100/49.8*40=80.3 kg or 80 kg
• Nitrogen application should be applied in splits
MOP is required. So based on fertilizer analysis and
and slow release mode to minimize loss.
soil test information the fertilizer application rates
• Frequent application in small quantity through
are calculated as above.
foliar application is most efficient and results in
quick recovery of crops.
48
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
The formula for calculating the fertilizer to be Therefore, for soils with sulphur deficiency, am-
applied (kg/ha) = monium sulphate is a better choice and for soils
with normal sulphur levels, urea presents a better
100
N source.
--------------------------------------- X recommended
Nutrient content in the dose (kg/ha) Example - 2
fertilizer material (%)
1. Single Super Phosphate (SSP) with 7 % P
Nutrient cost comparison costs Rs.480 per 100 kg.
Example - 1 2. Di - Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) 20% P
and 18% N costs Rs.1596 per 100 kg.
1. Urea with 46% N costs Rs.562.20 per 100 kg.
2. Ammonium sulphate 20% N costs Rs.1029 per SSP has 7% P i.e. 7 kg P in every 100 kg SSP. There-
100 kg. fore unit value of P in SSP: 480/7= Rs.68.57 per kg P.
Urea has 46% N i.e. 46 kg N in every 100 kg urea. Whereas, DAP has 20% P and 18% N, i.e. 20 kg P
Therefore unit value of N in urea: 562.2/46= Rs.12.22 and 18 kg of N in every 100 kg of DAP.
per kg N. Ammonium sulphate has 20.6% N i.e. 20
Cost of Nitrogen in 100 kg of DAP = (18 X 12.22 ) =
kg N in every 100 kg fertilizer and 24% sulphur.
Rs.219.96. Therefore unit value of P in DAP: (1596
Therefore unit value of N in ammonium sulphate:
– 219.96 = 1376.00); i.e. 1376/20= Rs.68.80 per kg P
1029/20.6= Rs.49.95 per kg N. Thus, the nitrogen is
cheaper in urea. Yet, ammonium sulphate also has Thus, the unit cost of P is the same in both the ferti-
24% sulphur in it. lisers. Yet, DAP also has 18% N in it. Therefore, for
soils with nitrogen requirement, DAP is the better
choice.
GUIDE FOR MIXING FERTILIZERS
           1. Muriate of Potash
           2. Sulphate of Potash
           3. Sulphate of ammonia
           4. Calcium ammonium nitrate
           5. Sodium Nitrate
           6. Calcium cynanamide
           7. Urea
           8. Superphosphate single or triple
           9. Ammonium phosphate
           10. Basic slag
           11. Calcium carbonate
 Fertilizers which can be mixed
 Fertilizers which may be mixed shortly before use
 Fertilizers which can not be mixed
Note: The crossing point of the required vertical column and horizontal colum indicates the possibility of mixing or otherwise
of the fertilizer
Compatibility of Fertilizers
49
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
hsatoP
fo
etairuM
.1
hsatoP
fo
etahpluS
.2
ainomma
fo
etahpluS
.3
etartin
muinomma
muiclaC
.4
etartiN
muidoS
.5
edimananyc
muiclaC
.6
aerU
.7
elpirt
ro
elgnis
etahpsohprepuS
.8
etahpsohp
muinommA
.9
gals
cisaB
.01
etanobrac
muiclaC
.11
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Organic fertilizers • It reduces the bulk density to desirable level
Organic manures are natural products used to pro- (1.3g/cc)
vide the nutrients to crops. Examples of organic • It provides enough food for micro organisms in
manure are cow dung, farmyard manure, green ma- the soil and helps to build up microorganisms
nure, compost from crop residues, vermicompost in the soil
and other biological waste. • Nutrients slow release nature is very useful for
long duration and plantation crops
Organic manures increase the organic matter in the
soil. Organic matter in turn releases the plant food Disadvantage
in available form for the use of crops. However, or- • It is bulky
ganic manures should not be seen only as carriers of • Cost of handling, transportation and storage
plant food. These manures also enable a soil to hold
are high
more water and also help to improve the drainage
• High labour input
in clay soils. They provide organic acids that help to
• High cost per kg of nutrients
dissolve soil nutrients and make them available for
the plants. Vermi-Compost: Vermi-composting is a process
by which earthworms convert organic waste into
Additionally, organic manures have low nutrient
fertile manure. Important spp of earthworm used
content and, therefore, need to be applied in large
for vermicomposting in Indian conditions are Epi-
quantities. For example, to get a standard mixture
geic Eugeniae, Eisenia Foetida, and Perionyx Exca-
of 25 kg NPK, almost 1000-2000 kg organic manure
vatus.
is required, whereas the same amount of NPK can
be easily obtained with a 50 kg bag of NPK fertilizer.
Earthworms
• Feed on soil and soil organic matter and con-
Compost: Compost is well decomposed organic
vert it into compost
wastes like plant residues, animal dung and urine
• Encourage growth of useful micro organisms
earth from cattle sheds, waste fodder, etc.
• Aerate and pulverize the soil
Tips for FYM preparation • Make soil porous and improving drainage
• Provide shade to compost site • Increasing water holding capacity of soil
• Make compost pit in a well drained elevated • Give strength to plant immunity system
place
Advantages of vermi-compost
• Smaller heaps of manageable shape are better
• Easy to use
• Keep the pit free from weeds
• Low cost to produce
• Pit should be near to cattle shed and water
• Convert organic matter in to good manure in
source
short time
• Allowing for full maturity
• Also use urine
How to make it
• If ash is added do not heap in the pit but spread
• Enrich vermi-compost with bio-agents
uniformly
• Earthworms are our friends. Protect them and
How to use nurture in the field
• Manure should not be kept exposed in the field
Green manures
before application
• Select important species
• Preferably apply in bands into the soil instead
• Find a season to fit the green manuring crop in
of broadcast. In case broadcast, work it into the
to cropping system
soil immediately
• Incorporate when 45 days old
Advantage • Allow 15-20 days before next planting for de-
• Complete plant nutrient composition
• Improved soil structure increases soil aeration Example: Sunhemp and Daincha
and drainability
Green leaf manure
• Organic matter acts as biological clay and in-
crease nutrient and water holding capacity of • Grow leguminous trees on road side, on bunds
soil and waste land
50
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
• Loppings of trees can be incorporated 15 days nutrient solutions which also contain a small
before planting concentration of micronutrients
• Provide approximately 5 to 10 tons Nutrient content of important organic manures
Example: Pongamia and Neem
Nutrient content of important organic manures
Oilcakes Organic Manure Percentage of Nutrients
• Concentrated organic matter
Nitrogen Phos- Potas-
• Mix with chemical fertilizer is useful as they
phorus sium
make fertilizer slow release
(P2O5) (K2O)
• Use to enrich compost/organics
Poultry Manure 1.2-1.5 - -
• Use preferably non edible oil cakes
Sheep Manure 0.8-1.6 - -
Liquid Fertilisers
Farmyard Ma- 0.4 0. 3 0.2
• Liquid form of fertilizers are applied with irri-
nure
gation water or for direct application through
Compost 0.5 0.25 0.5
foliar spray to augment yield and improve qual-
ity of a variety of crops like fruits, vegetables,
Bone Meal 3.5 21.0 -
oil seeds, pulses, cereals, cotton, tobacco, sug-
arcane, tea, etc.
Bio-Fertilizers
• It will ease handling, less labour requirement as
well as the possibility of mixing with herbicides These are products of microbial origin containing
have made the liquid fertilisers more acceptable live cells of micro organisms multiplied in a labo-
to farmers ratory and mixed with a carrier material like finely
powdered coal, lignite or humus and supplied in a
Fertigation solid form.
• Fertigation is the judicious application of ferti-
Basically two types of bio fertilizer distinguished
lizers by combining it with irrigation water
based on their capacity to supply nitrogen or phos-
• Fertigation can be achieved through fertilizer
phorus. Some bio-fertilizers have the capacity to
tank, venturi system, injector pump, Non-Elec-
supply nitrogen because they have the capacity to
tric Proportional Liquid Dispenser (NEPLD)
absorb nitrogen gas from the atmosphere in asso-
and automated system
ciation with plants and use the nutrient for their cell
Advantages of Fertigation synthesis. The nitrogen fixed becomes available to
• Ensures a regular flow of water as well as , re- crop plants after the plant material is incorporated
sulting in increased growth rates for higher in to soil. This process is known as symbiotic nitro-
yields gen fixation. Other nitrogen fixing organisms can
• Offers greater versatility in the timing of the live freely in soil and fix nitrogen. There is one more
nutrient application to meet specific crop de- type where the organism establishes a weak or as-
mands sociative symbiosis and fixes nitrogen.
• Improves availability of nutrients and their up-
In addition to nitrogen fixers there are some bacte-
take by the roots
ria and fungi, which are used as bio-fertilizers to en-
• Safer application method which eliminates the
hance phosphorus supply to crops. They solubilize
danger of burning the plant root system
insoluble or difficulty soluble phosphorus through
• Offers simpler and more convenient applica-
their capacity to produce organic acids.
tion than soil application of fertilizer, thus, sav-
ing time, labour, equipment and energy
• Improves fertilizer use efficiency
• Reduction of soil compaction and mechanical
damage to the crops
• Potential reduction of environmental contami-
nation
• Convenient use of compound and ready-mix
51
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Plant Nutrient Microorganism Crops Benefited
NITROGEN a) Symbiotic Rhizobium Azolla All leguminous crops; Rice
b) Associative Symbiosis Azospirillum All cereal crops; Sugar cane
c) Non Symbiotic Azotobacter Blue- green Algae All crops; Rice
PHOSPHORUS Microorganism Crops Benefited
a) Solubilizing Bacteria: (Bacillus, Pseudomonas) All Crops
Effect
Fungi: (Aspergillus Penicillium) All Crops
b) Absorbing Ecto Mycorrhizal Tree crops
Effect
Endomycorhizae All Crops
All bio-fertilizers are microorganisms belonging to Algal inoculants are cultivated on submerged soils
group of bacteria or fungi or blue-green algae. in tanks, dried and supplied as soil based culture
(Inoculants). Endomycorrhizal inoculants are sup-
The capacity of N-Fixers to supply N to crops var-
plied as pieces of roots of grass plants infected with
ies from 10 kg – 100 kg/ha and symbiotic nitrogen
mycorrhizae. Ectomycorrihizal inoculants are culti-
fixers particularly rhizobium bacteria are very effi-
vated in the laboratory and mixed with carrier ma-
cient. The P-Solubilizers and P-Absorbers can mo-
terial for supply. Azolla are supplied as fresh fronds
bilize insoluble phosphorus to the extent of 10 Kg
(leaf). The bio-fertilizers are inoculated to seeds or
to 50 kg P/ha. Mycorrihizae are symbiotic fungi,
applied directly to soil after suspending them in wa-
which get associated with plant roots. Azolla is a
ter. Azolla is applied directly to soil, which on mul-
water fern which establishes a very active and ben-
tiplication establishes a very active symbiotic asso-
eficial association with blue-green algae - Anabaena
ciation with Anabaena, a blue-green alga.
• The best nutrient management method is Integrated Nutrient Management.
• Use bulk quantity of organic matter to provide good physical and chemical prop-
erties to soil.
• Smaller quantities of chemical fertilizer to provide quick release, which matches
the uptake pattern of crops.
52
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Soil and Plant Nutrition
I. Package of Practices – Banana
Banana is one of the most commonly grown fruit crop of the country. India produces about
26.217 MT of banana from an area of 0.709 Mha with an average productivity of 37.0 mt/ha.
Major producing states are Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, As-
sam and Madhya Pradesh. Tamil Nadu has 0.1244 mha under banana and the total production
during 2008-09 is 6.667 Mmt with 53.6 mt/ha productivity. In Gujarat, banana crop is cultivated
in 11 districts covering an area of about 60900 ha. Gujarat is ranking 3rd among the states of India
with an average productivity of 58.7t/ha. Unripe fruits are used for making chips, vegetable flour,
etc. Ripened fruits are used for preparing drink, jam, beer, salad, etc. Banana fruits are having
numerous medicinal uses (as per Ayurveda). From psedostem threads are obtained and used for
making rope and cloths.
Prevailing Varieties: Basarai, Lokhandi, Robasta, Shreemanti and Grand Naine.
Climate: Banana grows well in warm and humid climate with an average temperature of 27oC
and rainfall of 2,000 to 2,500 mm. However, it requires assured irrigation facility.
Soil type suitability: Loamy and salty clay loam soils with good fertility status are best suited
for banana cultivation. However, extremely clayey and sandy soils are not suitable for banana crop.
Land preparation: The land should be ploughed, harrowed and planked to achieve levelled
fields. For planting banana, dugout a pit of 30 x 30 x 30 cm size at a spacing of 1.5 x 1.5 m.
Soil sterilization: After land preparation, the pits should be exposed to the sunlight for 10 to
15 days. In the case of heavy infestation of soil born pest and diseases, the soil solarization should
be done using transparent plastic for a period of 15 to 20 days during summer season (preferably
during May).
Time of plating: Optimum time for planting is 15th June to 15th July. Banana planting is done
either by suckers or tissue culture plant.
Suckers: Suckers should be selected from a healthy field of banana. Sufficient care should be
taken that suckers should not be damaged during digging and transport. Fresh sucker, weighing
about 500 to 1,500 g, should be selected. For control of fungal diseases, suckers should be dipped
in a solution of aurofugine1 (10 g / 100 litres of water) for 1.5 hour prior to planting.
Tissue culture plant: Select healthy and uniform plants.
Irrigation and scheduling: The water requirement of banana crop by surface method of ir-
rigation (25-30 irrigations) is 1,500-1,800 mm. By drip irrigation method, water requirement is
900-1,080 mm. The drip system should be operated on alternate day for a period of 1.05 to 2.25
hours during winter and 2.5 to 2.75 hrs during summer at a pressure of 1.2 kg/cm2.
1Aurofugine- To be used with caution.
53
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
ananaB
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Details of Drip System
Lateral spacing 1.5 m
Dripper per plant 2
Spacing between two drippers 30 cm away on either side of stem
Dripper discharge rate 4.0 lph
Water requirement for banana under drip irrigation
Months after planting Liters / day / plant
1-3 5
3-5 9
5-8 11
8-11 10
Application of Fertilizers
Basal
FYM should be applied @ 20 to 25 t/ha at the time of land preparation. Top dressing of fertilizer
should be done as given below
For using water-soluble fertilizers, the following schedule of fertigation may be followed:
Nutrient Fertilizer application schedule
N (180g/plant) 7 to 8 splits at an interval of 15 to 20
days.
P (72g/plant) 7 to 8 splits at an interval of 15 to 20
days.
K (180g/plant) 7 to 8 splits at an interval of 15 to 20
days.
Time of application: The total quantities of water-soluble fertilizers should be applied in 7 to 8
splits at an interval of 15 to 20 days. The first split should be applied at the time of planting before
monsoon and the rest should be applied after the cessation of monsoon.
Weeding: Banana fields should be kept weed free either by hand weeding/interculturing or by
weedicide (diuron @ 1.2 kg/ha as pre emergence) application. Mulching with black plastic (50 mi-
cron) or sugarcane trash (@ 10 t/ha) should be done. If required, hand weeding should be done prior
to mulching.
Desuckering: First desuckering should be done manually. To minimize the regeneration of suck-
ers, 3 ml of diesel or kerosene should be injected into the cut portion of the suckers.
54
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Banana
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Plant protection measures
Diseases Control Measures
Bunchy top Aphid should be controlled by applying systemic insecticide
viz; Acetamiprid: (0.2gm/litre).
Premature fruit ripening Sucker should be dipped in the solution of Aurofugin1 10 g in
100 litres of water for 1.5 hrs.
Pests Control Measures
Rhizome weevil and nematode Neem based products such as Neem oil, Neem cake, Neem
seed Kernal extract (NSKE) can be applied.
Bunch coverage: After the complete formation of the bunch, it should be covered by LLDP film
bag (blue, white or black colour). This improves quality as well as yield of banana.
Time of harvesting: Maturity varies with variety but usually the crop takes about 12-14 months
to mature.
Yield: By adopting the above practices, the banana yields about 70 to 80 t/ha. Generally, size and
colour based grading is done.
Post harvest handling and storage: Bananas can be stored for up to a week in a cool place
but unripe bananas should not be stored in the refrigerator as this may irreversibly interrupt the
ripening process. If the banana is no longer green, then it is ripe and can be stored for a maximum of
one week. For storage, banana should be stored at 13o to 140C. Bunches should be kept out of light
after harvest since this hastens ripening and softening. For export, hands are cut into units of 4-16
fingers, graded for both length and girths and carefully placed in poly-lined boxes to hold 12 to 18
kg depending on export requirement. Prior to packaging fruits are cleaned in water or dilute sodium
hypochlorite solution to remove the latex and treated with thiobendazole.
Plastic packaging: Keeping quality of banana can be increased when packed in 400 gauge LDPE
(Low-Density Poly Ethylene) bags with or without ventilation either under ambient temperature or
in a zero energy cool chamber (13.5°C). Storing of banana fruits in unvented polybags at low tem-
perature could extend the shelf life of the fruits up to 19.33 days.
Cost economics
Annual system cost (Rs /ha) 17,500
Cost of cultivation (Rs/ha) 1, 08,000
Total cost (Rs/ha) 1, 25,500
Total income (Rs/ha) 2, 10,000 to 2, 40,000
Net income (Rs/ha) 84,500 to 1, 14,500
C:B ratio 1:1.67
1Aurofugin- To be used with caution.
55
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
ananaB
Soil and Plant Nutrition
II. Packages of Practices – MANGO
Mango is the most important fruit crop of India. India produces about 12.750 Mt of Mango
from an area of 2.309 Mha with an average productivity of 5.5 mt/ha. Major producing
states are Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Orissa &
Maharashtra. Uttar Pradesh has 0.2712 mha under mango and the total production during 2008-
09 is 3.465 Mt with 12.8 mt/ha productivity. India ranks first in the world for mango production
and area under cultivation. Mango is a rich source of vitamin A and has a fairly good content of
vitamin C. Mango fruits are used for preparation of pickle, chatani, amchur, jam, squash, nectar
and many other delicious products.
Climate and soil: Mango can be grown from alluvial to lateritic soils except black cotton soil
which has poor drainage. The temperature between 24 and 270C is ideal for mango cultivation.
Variety: Dashehari, Langra, Chausa, Bombay Green, Lucknow Safeda, Mallika and Amrapali.
Multiplication of genuine planting material: Mango can be propagated by veneer, wedge
and soft wood grafting. The protected nurseries in polyhouses and use of sprinkler and drip is
becoming common for raising humidity level, which is required for higher grafting success rate.
Preparation of land: The land should be prepared one month before planting. The pits of 1m x
1m x 1m size are dug. The pits are exposed for 2 to 4 weeks to kill harmful soil organisms.
Soil sterilization: Soil sterilization can be achieved through both physical and chemical means.
Physical control measures include steam and solar energy. Chemical control methods include her-
bicides and fumigants. Soil sterilization can also be achieved by using transparent plastic mulch
film (25 micron thickness) termed as soil solarisation.
Planting: Square and rectangular systems are popular. Before planting, pits are filled with FYM
at the rate of 15-20 kg/plant. The grafts should be planted during July to September.
Planting density: High density (3m x 6m or 5m x 5m) planting helps increase the yield/unit
area. Normal planting distance of mango is 8m x 8m.
Canopy Management: Training should be done after 6th month of planting. It is essential to
space the branches properly and to help in intercultural operation. At initial branching height be-
tween 60 to 70 cm is appropriate.
Water requirement of the crop
Age of the plant Water requirement of the crop in litres/day/tree
Young plant (up to 3 years) 9-12 lts
3-6 years 30-35 lts
6-10 years 50-60 lts
9-12 years 80-90 lts
Fully grown trees 120 lts
A young tree requires 2 drippers at a distance of 1m on lateral lines, while fully-grown tees require
2 drippers with double lateral lines at 1-1.5 m distance.
56
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Mango
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Application of fertilizers: Mango should be manured with phosphorus twice in a year i.e. the
beginning of the monsoon (June-July) and during the period of post-monsoon (September-Octo-
ber). Usually fertilizers (N and K) are applied in split doses in the month of June-July, September-
October, January-February and March-April. For adult trees (10 years or above) 1,000g N, 75g
P2O5, 75g K2O and 100 kg FYM per year should be applied. Application of micronutrients such
as Zinc and Boron help in cell elongation process.
Malformation: Deblossoming at bud stage (1 cm long) alone or in combination with spray of
200 ppm NAA lowers the number of malformed panicle.
Alternate bearing management: Use of paclobutrazol (5-10g/m canopy diameter), 3 months
before budburst applied through soil drenching can be used for obtaining regular bearing.
Weed management: Black plastic mulch (100 micron) restricts the germination of weed seeds
and suppresses the weed growth. The size of the film requirement for young plant is 1 m x 1 m, and
for 8 years onwards film requirement is 2.5 m x 2.5 m around the tree.
Intercropping: In the interspaces of mango orchard, certain vegetable can be intercropped viz.
onion, tomato, radish, carrot, ginger, turmeric, methi, cabbage, etc. Moreover, fruit crops can also
be grown viz. papaya, pineapple, etc. for the initial 4-5 years.
Mulching: Soil drenching with paclobutrazol (5g and 10g/tree) coupled with black polythene
mulch (100 micron) results into minimum outbreak of September to October vegetative flushing,
giving an early and profuse flowering and a higher annual yield.
Plant Protection Measures
Insect pests Symptoms Control measures
Mango hopper Pest starts attacking during Spraying of acetamiprid or thiamethoxam
flowering season. (0.2gm/litre of water).
Mealy bug Nymphs suck juice from young Raking of soil around the trunk and mixing
shoots, panicles and flower with neem cake around tree trunk is effective.
pedicels.
Stem borer Pest makes tunnel through the Clearing tunnels with hard wire, pouring,
main trunk and branches. Emamectin benzoate (50 gm / litre) and
plugged with mud.
Fruit fly Pest makes the fruits rot by Application of acetamiprid or thiamethoxam
laying its eggs in clusters, just (0.2gm/litre of water).
before the ripening, under the
peel of fruits.
57
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
ognaM
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Disease Symptoms Control measures
Anthracnose It attacks leaves, flowering Spraying of Copper Oxychloride (0.03%)can
panicles and fruits. control this disease.
Powdery mil- Whitish powdery growth on Wettable sulphur (0.02%) and Bayleton
dew the leaves. (0.05%).
Bacterial Can- Unattractive fruits because StreptocycIine(100-200ppm), agrimycin
ker affected parts of fruits show (17% streptomycin) -100 (100ppm) and cop-
longitudinal crack and oozing per oxychloride1 (0.03%).
of bacterial exudate and lead-
ing to fruit drop.
Yield and quality control:
From a well grown up tree one can expect an average yield of 50-225 marketable fruits (50 kg) per
plant per year.
Harvesting and post harvest management:
From the 4th year onwards the mango fruits can be harvested at the mature green stage during
morning hours. After harvesting fruits are graded according to their size, weight, colour and ma-
turity. Packaging of fruits should be done in corrugated fibreboard (CFB) boxes. Tissue paper and
polythene foam paper are used for wrapping high-value fresh mangoes. Polyethylene lining has
been found beneficial as it maintains humidity, which results in lesser shrinkage during storage.
Dashahari treated with calcium chloride solution (4%) at sub-atmospheric pressure of 500 mm Hg
for 5 minutes can be stored at 12 oC for 27 days.
Cost economics of drip irrigated mango (one ha)
Rate of interest 10.5%
Life of system 7.5 years
Expected yield 19 t/ha
Planting distance 5m x 5m
Cost of cultivation Rs.24, 000
Fixed cost Rs.30, 298
Annual cost of drip system Rs.8,713
Expected cost benefit ratio 1: 6.0
58
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Mango
Soil and Plant Nutrition
III. Package of Practices - Sugarcane
Time Schedule Recommended Operations
Before planting Plough the land up to 45 cm depth.
Apply 25 tons per hectare of well-decomposed Farm Yard Manure
(FYM) or decomposed molasses or compost and deep plough the field
with tractor.
Make ridges and furrows with 80 cm spacing having 20 cm height and
up to 10 m length.
Apply 375 kg super phosphate in the furrows.
Planting day Select about 75,000 two-budded setts per hectare from 6-8 months old
nursery or raise seedlings in poly bags with single-budded setts.
Treat the setts for 10 minutes by dipping in a solution prepared with
Thiamine, 2.5 kg urea and 2.5 kg lime in 250 litres of water.
Plant the setts 2 cm deep with buds on the sides.
For every 10 furrows, plant setts on 2 rows in one furrow for gap filing
purpose.
3rd day after planting To control weeds, spray atrataf @ 2.5 kg/ha in 500 litres of water with
hand sprayer.
5th day after planting Spread sugarcane trash up to a height of 15 cm on the ridge.
25th day after planting Gap-fill with seedlings raised in polybags or the plants taken from the
2 rows planted- furrows in every 10th furrow.
30th day after planting Mix 5 kg Azospirillum and 5 kg phosphobacterium per ha mixed with
250 kg powdered FYM. Apply at the bottom of the plants and irrigate
immediately.
From 35th day after From 35 to 100 days after planting Irrigate once in 7-10 days.
planting
To prevent attack by early shoot borer, apply Sulphur on the setts and
cover with soil.
If 25-30% of the shoots are affected, then for every 100 metre length
of furrow, mix Sulphur and apply using a hand sprayer on the tips and
bottom of the shoots.
59
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
enacraguS
Soil and Plant Nutrition
45th day after planting Do hand weeding.
Apply in pits a mixture of 110 kg nitrogen1, 60 kg of potash and 35 kg
of neem cake per hectare.
60th, 90th and 120th Spray a mixture of urea 2.5%, potassium chloride 2.5% during periods
days after planting of drought.
On the 60th day, apply a mixture of 5kg azospirillum, 5kg phospho-
bacterium and 250 kg of decomposed FYM in powder form at the bot-
tom of the plants and irrigate immediately.
On the 90th day, do hand weeding; apply in pits (after earthing up) a
mixture of 110 kg of nitrogen1, 60 kg of potassium and 35 kg of neem
cake per hectare.
120th day after planting Under drought conditions, apply 60 kg of potassium and irrigate im-
mediately.
150 days to 225 days Carry out de-trashing at 150 days after planting.
after planting
If inter-node borer exists, release parasites 6 times @ 5 cc per hectare
once in 15 days.
101-210 days – irrigate once in 7 days.
210th day- detrash and tie lodged canes.
225th day- spray acetamiprid or thiamethoxam (2ml/litre of water) to
control mealy bugs, white fly and scales.
260th day Spray Emamectin benzoate (50 gm / litre) of water under the leaves (if
required) to control pyrilla and all sucking pests.
270 to 360 days Irrigate once in 15 days.
Stop irrigation 15 days before harvesting.
Harvest Cut canes at the bottom close to the ground with sickles or sharp knife.
Remove trash, roots, water shoots and cane tops and send clean canes
to the factory.
1Nitrogen- To be used with caution and preventive measures (Gloves, etc).
60
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Sugarcane
Soil and Plant Nutrition
SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS: RATOON CROP
Time Schedule Recommended Operations
Remove trash, stubble shave uniformly under correct moisture condi-
tions with sharp spades.
Mix 15 tons of FYM or 25 tons of compost or 25 tons of decayed mo-
lasses with 375 kg Superphosphate (75 kg of P2O5), 135 kg of nitrogen
and 35 kg of neem cake per hectare in pits.
Irrigate immediately, cutting the sides of the ridges and ensuring mix-
ing of applied manures well with the soil.
Control weeds by spraying atrataf @2.5 kg in 500 litres of water with
hand spray.
9th -10th day Mix 5kg azospirillum and 5 kg phosphobacteria per hectare with 250
kg of powdered FYM and apply at the bottom of the plants and irrigate
immediately.
Spread trash obtained from plant canes on the furrows.
25th – 30th day Gap-fill with grown up plants.
To prevent attack by early shoot borer, apply Sulphur on the setts and
cover with soil.
35th day Mix 5kg azospirillum per hectare with 250 kg of powdered FYM and
apply at the bottom of the plants and irrigate immediately.
From 1-35 days Irrigate once in 7 days.
From 35-90 days Irrigate once in 10 days.
60th day Do hand weeding.
Apply in pits a mixture of 110 kg nitrogen, 60 kg of potash and 35 kg
of neem cake per hectare and follow light earthing-up.
90th day Apply 60 kg of potash additionally in drought situations.
91- 250 days Irrigate once in 7 days.
61
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
enacraguS
Soil and Plant Nutrition
30, 60 and 90 days Spray a mixture of urea 2.5%, and potassium chloride 2.5%on the
leaves in drought situations.
120th day Detrash and earth up well.
121 to 210 days Release Trichogramma parasites (when required) once in 15 days.
180 days: Detrash a second time.
210 days Spray acetamiprid or thiamethoxam (0.2gm/litre of water) to control
mealy bugs, white fly and scale insects.
251-360 days Irrigate once in 15 days and stop irrigation 15 days before harvest.
Harvest Cut canes at the bottom close to the ground with sickles or sharp knife.
Remove trash, roots, water shoots and cane tops and send clean canes
to the factory.
Note: Water Management – Irrigation gap has to be adjusted depending up on quantity of rain
fall Reduce gap between irrigation in sandy soils and increase it in block soils.
62
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Sugarcane
Soil and Plant Nutrition
IV. Package of Practice for Nagpur Mandarin
Cultivation
Selection of site
Orchard: Soil should be well drained and of shallow or medium depth. Deep heavy soils hav-
ing more than 60% clay contents are not suitable for citrus plantation. Nursery: Nursery
should be located at least 500 meters away preferably on western side of the orchard to minimize
incidence of insect pests and diseases.
Raising of citrus nursery
Sowing of Rootstock Seeds
Potting mixture of soil, sand and FYM or compost should be used in equal proportion (1:1:1) for
filling of trays in primary nursery and polythene bags in secondary nursery. Before it is used for
filling the bags/trays, the potting mixture should be solarised. For solarisation, it is spread on the
concrete platform in 4” thick layer in the month of April – May, sufficiently moistened with water,
then covered fully with the white polythene sheet, sealing its edges with soil. Then it should be left
undisturbed for 11/2 to 2 months in the hot sun for solarisation.
• Only certified seeds of rough lemon or Rangpur lime rootstocks should be used.
• Shade dried medium size bold seeds of rootstocks should be treated with vitavax or thiram
(@ 3g/kg seed) and sown on the raised beds or in plastic trays during September – October.
• Stagnation of water in beds should be avoided otherwise roots of young plants may start root-
ing.
• Uniform seedlings of medium height only be selected discarding either vigorous or the weak
and dwarf ones while transferring to secondary nursery. Plants having hooked or bent roots
should be discarded.
• Disease free budgrafts of nagpur mandarin
Plant Protection Measures
• Phytophthora infected plants must be eliminated. In case of phytophthora infection drenching
of plants with either metalaxyl MZ72 @ 2.75 g/l water or fosetyl Al @ 2.5 g/l water should be
done. Second spray should be given after 40 days.
• To prevent infestation of insect pests like citrus leaf miner and thrips plants should be sprayed
either with acetamiprid or thiamethoxam (0.2gm/litre of water) at 10 days intervals.
• The growth of plants is also affected adversely due to mite attack which can be controlled by
spraying plans with Fenazaquin 10% EC @ 4ml/litre and wettable sulfur @ 3 g/l water, alter-
natively at 15-20 days interval.
• In containerized nursery irrigation, fertilizer application, weed control, insect pest and disease
control as well as cultural operations can be performed at ease.
63
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
niradnaM
rupgaN
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Budding
• Budsticks should be used from the author-
ized and certified source only.
• Budstick should be drawn from the last
years flush. The stick should have pencil
thickness, be roundish and have whitish
longitudinal streaks.
• Budstick should not be drawn from rub-
bery wood or kikarpani plants.
• Budding should be performed at 10” – 12”
height on the rootstock seedling.
Orchard Establishment Disease Free Bud Grafts of Nagpur Mandarin
Pits size
• Pits for planting should be 2’6” x 2’6” x 2’6” (75 x 75 x 75 cm) size and spaced at 6 x 6 m dis-
tance.
• To avoid soil borne fungi or nematodes soil of roots should be removed.
Pre-planting treatment for budlings
• Roots of budling should be dipped in the solution of metalaxy1MZ72 2.75 g for 10-15 min-
utes before planting.
Planting of budlings
• While planting care should be taken that rootstock union remains at least 6” above ground.
Manure and fertilizer application
• Nitrogen containing fertilizers should be applied in three equal splits in January, July and No-
vember months; phosphorus containing fertilizers in two splits in January and July months
and Potassium containing fertilizers may be applied as singly dose in January.
• Surveys conducted by NRCC in Kalmeshwar, Katol, Narkhed, Saoner, Hingna and Ramtek
tehsils of Nagpur district have revealed N deficiency in most of the orchards and P deficiency
in leaf and soil of 50% orchards. Similarly, leaf and soil K was either at desired levels or even
more than it. Citrus trees are nitrogen loving plants. They respond well to the applied ni-
trogenous fertilizers. During fruit development K may also be applied as it may fell deficient.
Supplementary doses of P and K at 200 and 100 g/tree, respectively, may be included in the
fertilizer package recommended for bearing orchard.
Fertilizer doses
Fertilizers /Age of I Year II Year III Year IV Year and
tree Above
Nitrogen 150 300 450 600
Phosphorus 50 100 150 200
Potassium 25 50 75 100
As far as possible 1/3rd of the dose of N may be given through farm yard manure/compost, oil cakes
etc.
64
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Nagpur
Mandarin
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Leaf sampling
For correct diagnosis of nutritional status use of correct sampling technique is very important.
For this, it is important to know as to how many leaves, when, from which part of the plant and
from how many trees should be sampled. In case of ambia bahar, 5-6 month old leaves in August-
October and for mrig bahar 6-8 months old leaves in December and February should be sampled.
As far as possible, the 2nd, 3rd of 4th leaf should be picked from the tip of the non-bearing shoot,
preferably at 1.5 – 2 m above the ground and sampled.
Drip irrigation
With the help of a drip system of irrigation, the required quantity of water can be provided right
at the feeder root system. Similarly, water-soluble fertilizers and micronutrients also can be given
through the drip system. Water requirement of irrigation depends upon age of the tree and season
of the year (Table 1). Mulching with drip irrigation maintains moisture in soil for a longer period.
Water requirement of the nagpur mandarin (litres / day / tree)
Month Age of the three (years)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 >10
January 7 15 22 30 44 62 72 82 92 102
February 9 20 30 40 60 82 96 101 121 137
March 12 26 40 53 78 109 127 145 163 181
April 14 29 43 63 87 123 143 163 183 204
May 17 34 52 74 102 143 166 188 211 235
June 11 22 34 48 67 95 110 126 142 157
July 8 18 26 41 56 79 92 105 118 131
August 7 14 23 34 42 60 70 80 90 100
September 8 15 25 36 45 65 76 87 98 108
October 9 17 27 40 52 79 92 105 118 131
November 8 15 25 36 45 63 74 85 96 150
December 6 11 19 24 35 49 57 65 73 82
Weed control
For effective and economic control of mono and dicotyledonous weeds, pre-emergence weedi-
cides, diuron 3 kg at the end of May and 120 days thereafter should be done. For post-emergence
weed control, glyphosate @ 4 l/ha should be sprayed on weeds before flowering.
Fruit drop
Fruit drop in citrus is of serious nature which occurs at least twice; i.e. the first time when the fruits
are little more than the marble size and the second time when the fruits are fully developed or at
the time of colour break. This drop is very serious in the ambia bahar crop pre-harvest fruit drop in
65
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
niradnaM
rupgaN
Soil and Plant Nutrition
nagpur mandarin, which is called as pre-harvest fruit drop and is important from economic point
of view to the orchardists. To control the fruit drop that occurs after fruit set, two foliar sprays of
either 2,4-D or GA3 at 15 ppm + urea 1% and copper oxychloride2 (0.3%) at monthly intervals in
April – May are recommended. Same spray concentration is recommended for controlling pre-
harvest drop in the months of September and October. 2,4-D and GA3 may be dissolved earlier in
little quantity (30 – 40 ml for 1g) of some organic solvent such as alcohol or acetone before making
the spray solution.
Control of Insect Pests
Blackfly (Kolshi): Nymphs of citrus blackfly attack the young flush, suck the sap and excrete
sweet and sticky liquid, which favours rapid development of black sooty mould that covers entire
plant surface. The process of photosynthesis is hampered greatly resulting in stunted growth of
plants, low intensity of flowering, scarce fruiting which are insipid in taste and decline of citrus
orchard sets. For control of blackfly two sprays of insecticides viz. acetamiprid 0.2 g/litre water
should be given at 50% egg hatching stage that normally occurs in the II weed of July and the I
week of December and April. One additional spray which targets the adult blackfly population
when it is as its peak helps tremendously in controlling the pest.
Method of spraying: Spraying should be directed at the underside of the leaf, ensuring the
complete drenching of the tree. For proper coverage and penetration of canopy, use of power
sprayers for spraying operation should be envisaged. Insecticides should be used alternatively for
better results.
Citrus psylla: Numerous young brownish nymphs of psylla are seen crawling on the young
flush. Several dirty gray colour adults can be seen sitting in line with tails upwards. Voluminous
desapping by the nymphs results into the drop of flush, flowers and berries. Affected branches
dry and die-back sets in. The nymphs also excrete white crystalline powder, which invites fungal
infestation. Psylla can be controlled by spraying acetamiprid 0.2 g/litre water twice with 10 days
interval during the initial days of flushing. Bark eating caterpillar (Larva) are incidence of mites
on fruits (Lalya).
Leaf miner: Serpentine mines are seen on the new leaves and also young stems are mined when
the incidence is severe. At times death of young shoots may occur. The problem is quite serious in
nursery and in young orchard. To control citrus leaf miners, spray either imidacloprid 5 ml (To be
used in proper doses under guidance of an agriculture expert) and thiamethoxam 0.2g/litre water.
Bark eating caterpillar: The pest is noticed predominantly in the older and ignored orchards.
The hanging wooden frass and tunnel at the joint of two branches during October – April indicates
the presence of the pest. Larva remains hidden inside the tunnel during daytime and becomes
active in the night and feeds on the bark nearby the tunnel. This results into snapping of food sup-
ply, ultimately yellowing of leaves on the branch and its slow decline. For control of the pest the
wooden frass should be cleaned and each tunnel should be administered with Emamectin benzo-
ate/spinosad @0.4 ml/litre water.
Fruit sucking moth: The moth attacks the ripening fruits during late hours in the evening. The
moth punctures it making a hole in the ripening fruit to suck the juice through which an infection
may take place. Soon rottening starts, leading to fruit drop. Collection of dropped fruits and their
66
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Nagpur
Mandarin
Soil and Plant Nutrition
destruction followed by smoking of orchard late evening hours is suggested. For fruit fly control,
hanging of methl eugenol (feromone) traps is an effective method to check the pest.
Mites: Citrus rust mites attack in mrig bahar fruits especially during September – November.
The fruit surface, particularly the side exposed to sun, is brushed and develops a big patch of dark
brown colour – called ‘Lalya’ – only after 1 to 11/2 months. To check this, two alternating prophy-
lactic sprays at 15-20 days interval with Fenazaquin 10% EC @ 4ml/litre and wettable sulphur @ 3
g/l water are recommended in September – October. Similarly, a phytophthora caused gummosis
spray of acetamiprid/thiamethoxam @0.2g/litre water at the berry stage of the ambai fruits is re-
quired to protect the fruits from unpleasant scars.
Precautionary measures: Avoid water stagnation in orchard by providing channels along
the slope for proper drainage. Moreover, pruning of intermingling branches to allow aeration
and sunlight to prevent dampness in orchard are suggested. Presence of guava, pomegranate, chi-
ku, mango trees, etc. near the orchard act as the alternate hosts for blackfly, therefore, such trees
should also be covered with insecticidal sprays.
Control of Diseases
Twig Blight: Drying of fruit bearing branches after harvest is a common phenomenon. Removal
of such dried shoots along with the 2 cm lower live part, followed by a fungicidal spray i.e. copper
oxychloride or bordeaux paste application is recommended to check twig blight.
Gummosis, root rot and collar rot
• Proper diagnosis of the disease is must.
• Affected trees should be treated with metalaxyl MZ 72 @ 2.75 g or fosetyl AL @ 2.5 g/l water
till drenching once in May – June. The second spray should be given after 40 days. The tree
trunk and soil of the tree basin should also be sprayed/drenched.
• Removal of the rotten roots, cleaning the wound on the gum-oozing trunk with sharp knife
and then pasting with metalaxyl3 MZ 72 should be done.
• Apply bordeaux paste (1 kg CuSO4 + 1 kg CaOH + 10 l water) on tree trunk upto 2 to 21/2 ft
from ground twice i.e. before monsoon (May) and after monsoon (October).
Precautionary measures
• Avoid flood irrigation
• Follow the double ring system of irrigation so that water does not come in contact with
the tree trunk.
• Avoid deep ploughing under the tree to prevent damage/injury of the root system. Declin-
ing nagpur mandarin orchard rejuvenated orchard.
67
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
niradnaM
rupgaN
Soil and Plant Nutrition
Pre-harvest spray of fungicide: Three pre-harvest sprays of fungicides like difenocon-
azole @2ml/litre water at 15 day intervals till drenching prevent pre-harvest fruit drop by 54%. It
also controls post harvest diseases upto 70%. This spray remains effective for 3 weeks at normal
temperatures.
Post-harvest fungicidal treatment: Fruits dipped in fungicidal solution difenoconazole for
5 minutes are safe to minimize rotting upto 70% and can safely be stored for 3 weeks under normal
condition.
Precautionary measures
• Follow plant protection measures to keep bearing tree disease free and healthy.
• Post-harvest handling of fruits must be followed carefully to avoid any sort of injury of
fruits.
• Avoid the use of copper fungicides like b,ordeaux mixture, blitox, phytolan etc. at this
stage.
Rejuvenation of declining citrus orchards: Declining citrus orchards can be rejuvenated
with the use of developed technologies and brought into productive stage.
Harvesting
• Traditionally fruits are harvested by twisting and pulling forcefully which may lead to a hole in
the neck of the fruit or injury to the stem end. The fruits should be selectively harvested when
¾th of the skin turns yellow. TSS: Acidity ratio should not be less than 14 in both ambia and
mrig bahar fruits. TSS should be at least 10%. Once this stage is reached, harvesting should
not be delayed for colour development since other fruits may turn loose.
• Fruit should not be allowed to come in contact with soil and straw and also should not be
exposed to hot sun.
• Packing should be done immediately after harvesting.
• For waxing on a large scale packing line can be used. Washing and waxing (stay fresh high
shine was 2.5 g + Tebuconazole) and grading of fruits is also done automatically at the end.
• Graded fruits are packed in corrugated fibre board boxes (50 x 30 x 30 cm) which are telescop-
ic with holes on both the sides covering 5% of total side portion. To keep the fruits safe from
moisture in the store house, boxes should be externally laminated with plastic.
• For small scale (1 – 1.5 tonne) and short duration (20 – 25 days) storage an evaporative cool
chamber is recommended, costing Rs.10,000/- to 12,000/-.
• For delaying or postponing the harvest of the fruits, two sprays of GA3 (100 mg / 10 litre of
water) in 15 day intervals at the point of the colour break are recommended.
• For long duration cold storage, a temperature of 6-7 0 C and humidity 90-95% is desirable.
In such a situation, citrus fruits should not be stored for more than 45 days. To avoid chilling
injury, care should be taken that the temperature does not go down upto 40 C.
68
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Nagpur
Mandarin
Soil and Plant Nutrition
2.6. Lessons Learnt
1. Dark coloured soils are more fertile compared to light coloured soils. Neutral pH is more
suitable for majority of crops. Lime is used for amending acid soils and gypsum for alkaline
soil.
2. Soil testing is essential for judicious application of fertilisers based on nutrients status in the
soils.
3. Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) practices are useful for efficient, economic and sus-
tainable production.
4. Package and practices recommended by research stations may be adopted in totality
69
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3. Plant Protection
3.1. Objectives of the session
• To increase the awareness and understanding about the crop pest, diseases and weeds.
• To strengthen the farmer’s knowledge on effective management of insects, diseases and weeds in crops
through Integrated Pest Management.
• To sensitise farmers on safe handling of chemicals.
3.2. What we know at the end of the session
• Insects and their life cycles
• Methods of insect control including Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
• Plant protection equipments
• Symptoms of major diseases
• Integrated disease management
• Major weeds
• Methods of controlling weeds
• Safe handling of chemicals
I. Pest Management
3.3. Crop pest and their importance Complete metamorphosis
Complete metamorphosis has four distinct life cy-
Pest is any organism which is detrimental to crop
cle stages: egg, larva, pupa and adult.
production. Pest cause damage to the plant to
the extent of 30 - 90 per cent, sometimes it even Examples of insects that go through complete
causes total loss. Pest includes insects, diseases and metamorphosis are butterflies, silkworms, meal-
weeds. Non insect pest includes nematodes, snails worms and ladybugs. The larva can be worm-like
and rodents. even though the six legs are still visible. The larva
form moths and butterflies are called caterpillars.
Insect is any of many small invertebrate animals
Maggots are the larval stage of flies. The larvae eat
having a segmented body and three pairs of legs and
constantly and grow rapidly. A hard, protective case
usually two pairs of wings. Some insects are benefi-
forms around the larva at pupa stage. The pupa
cial and some are harmful to agriculture.
stage for a butterfly is called a chrysalis. The pupa
stage for moth is called cocoon.
What is the difference between
Incomplete metamorphosis
complete and incomplete metamor-
Incomplete metamorphosis has three life cycle stag-
phosis in insects?
es: egg, nymph and adult. The nymph looks similar
too but is a smaller version of the adult. The nymph
Incomplete and complete metamorphosis differs
is also wingless. Examples are grasshoppers, cock-
in the number of life cycle stages that insects go
roaches, ants and praying mantids.
through during their transformation from egg to
adult. The complete metamorphosis has 4 life cycle
3.4. Life stages of insects
stages and an incomplete metamorphosis has 3 life
cycle stages. • EGG is the initial stages of the insect. Normally
an insect lays at least 30 to 300.
• Egg hatch into LARVA or worms. Larva is the
71
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
damaging stage of insect to any crop. This stage
is normally seen in the field.
Eggs (10-15 I Instar II Instar III Instar
days) July to Larva Bollworm damaging cotton
October (14-18
months)
Biology of Arecanut
root grubs
2 year life cycle
Semilooper feeding on caster
How the damage is visible?
Adult (30-45 days) Pupa (25-30 day) • The larva eats the leaf, fruits or the whole plant
Between June to September February to March
parts. Hence the damage is visible.
• Some insects scrape the plant tissues. They also
Life stages of insects
cut the growing parts. Beetles, bugs, thrips and
• PUPA is an inactive stage preparing itself to de- hoppers usually suck the sap from the plants
velop to an adult. and growing parts, affecting the healthy plant.
• Mostly ADULTS insects are harmless but many
bugs and beetles are harmful to plants.
Grub of green lace wing
Mite damage in coconut buttons
Ladybird beetle
• Not at all. HONEY BEES are also insects which
Larva damaging leaves help in pollination (brings pollen from one
plant to another), thereby, increasing the yield.
72
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
They also provide us valuable HONEY and 3.6. How to control pest
other products. Another example of “friendly”
insects are SILK WORMS. Natural control
• NATURAL ENEMIES are insects that are ben-
eficial to man since they feed from the egg or Understanding insect life cycle: Insects mul-
larvae and pupae of crop pest. They are called tiply in large numbers. However the survival rate
biological control agents. Examples are the is very less as the nature maintains insect popula-
trichogramma parasite for sugarcane borers, tion. Factors like extreme temperature, heavy rains,
crub of green lacewing and ladybird beetle. heavy wind, water stagnation, birds, lizards, spiders,
animals, other insects and diseases control the pest.
3.5. Insect classification Natural barriers like sea, river, lake, mountains, etc.
prevent movement and spread of pest.
Insects can be classified into 3 groups, depending
on their behaviour in the farm such as Mechanical control: Some of the recommended
practices are
• Pests
• Removal of affected parts
• Beneficial insects
• Collection and destruction of insects
• Neutral insects
• Drying of seeds
Pest: Whether an insect species is a pest or not • Tar coating of trees to protect from termites
• Provision of barriers to prevent the entry of
depends on the situation. This means that a cer-
pests like green house / screen house, covering
tain insect could be a pest in one situation but not
of pomegranate fruits with butter paper, etc.
in another situation. For example, the caterpillars
• Clipping off the withered shoots
of diamondback moth feed on cabbage and other
plants of the cruciferae family. A farmer who grows
Agronomical methods: Recommended culti-
cauliflower will therefore consider it a pest. Yet, for
vation practices are as follows.
a farmer who grows potatoes or bananas, the dia-
• Summer ploughing: Opens up the soil and ex-
mondback moth is a neutral insect. When there is
poses pest to hot sun and predators.
nothing to feed it will not even occur. In a paddy
• Trap crop: Is growing the most favoured crop of
crop, black gram is a weed/pest since it is growing
the insect along with the main crop. The insect
unnecessarily. In a black gram field, cow pea is a
feeds from the trap crop and the main crop re-
weed since it can grow. Pest will occur only if there
mains not unaffected. Growing of resistant va-
is a host.
rieties also prevents the pest attack.
Beneficial insects
Main Crop Trap Crop
Some insects are beneficial to the farmer, because
Tomato Marigold
they are the natural enemies of harmful insects.
Cotton Okra, Castor, Onion, Garlic
Predators feed on other insects and hence control
the pest. For example, the assassin bug kills caterpil-
Maize Sorghum
lars and ladybird beetles feed on aphids. Some oth-
er insects are beneficial as they help in pollination • Mixed cropping: Is growing more than one crop.
of plants, e.g. honey bees. There are commercially • Inter cropping: Growing another crop along
beneficial insects such as silkworm, which produces with main crop, which increases the population
silk. of natural enemy.
Neutral insects Main Crop Intercrop
A neutral insect is neither a pest nor beneficial. Yet Cabbage Tomato, mustard
again, it really depends on the context. A mosquito
Cotton Black gram, green gram
in the rice field can be considered as neutral insect.
Maize Sorghum
• Crop Rotation: Is growing of different crops in
73
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
sequence instead of one single crop. Physical Control
• Keeping the fields clean: Managing the weeds • An age old practice is to mix pulses with red
which provides home for pests, treating the earth to protect pulses from pulse beetle.
seeds with pesticides, growing the crops in sea- • Drying of seeds in hot sun and using radiation
sons where pest incidence is less, application of are some of the physical control methods.
correct dose of fertilizer at correct time, opti-
Traps
mum use of water are some of the agronomical
methods to control pests. • Light Trap: Most of the insects are attracted to-
wards light. This principle is used to monitor
and control pests.
• Pheromone Trap: Insects are trapped using the
scent of one sex. This is commonly used for the
control of cotton bollworms.
• Yellow Sticky Traps: Some of the small sucking
insects are attracted by yellow colour. Hence
yellow coloured containers smeared with sticky
materials are kept inside the field to attract
sucking insect.
Ladybird beetle
Chemical control
Pest load and monitoring
Manual pesticide spraying
Pest monitoring: Is the practice of examining
• Pesticide application is the last resort to control
the crop to know whether the pest has affected the
pests.
crop and the extent of damage to decide whether to
• Pesticides to be selected carefully to control the
spray the pesticide or not.
pests.
Economic Threshold Level (ETL): ETL is • Dose and spraying equipments should be se-
the pest population density at which the control lected carefully.
measure has to be taken up to prevent the pest from • Get the correct recommendation from the ex-
reaching economic injury level. tension worker.
• Understand the difference between chemical
ETL for some of the crops are as follows
name and trade name. Trade name is the trader
• Brown plant hopper in paddy - nymph or adult
given name but the chemical name is originated
hopper 5-10 / hill
based on the chemical ingredient.
• Leaf miner in groundnut: 2 larvae / 10 plant or
20-30% plant infestation Botanicals: are plant origin pesticides like neem
• Whitefly in cotton: 5-10 adults / leaf or 20 based formulations. We can also use neem seed
nymphs / leaf kernal extract or neem oil along with soap as pes-
ticides. Commercial botanicals are available in the
Biological control methods: There are several
market and botanicals can be prepared, which cost
biological agents that controls pest such as
less and are eco friendly.
• The insect that kills another insect by living
inside its body is called Parasite. There is egg,
larval and pupal parasites. Trichogramma is an
egg parasite used commercially on sugarcane
borers.
• Predators are insects that eat other insects. For
example, the Ladybird Beetle, dragonfly, dam-
selfly, etc. Insects are also affected by many
diseases. Some are fungal, bacterial and viral.
Verticillium, a fungal agent, bacillus, a bacterial
agent, and NPV (Virus) are commercially used.
Trap
74
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
For example, Neem Seed Kernal Extract (NSKE) i) Dust (D): Poisons are mixed with gypsum,
5%, Gronim, Achook and Neemazal. talc or clay so that it can be used in powder form.
There is no need to mix with water.
3.7. Pesticides
ii) Wettable Powders (WP/WDP):Mixed with
dry fillers with sticking agents but these dry
Pesticides are the chemicals used to control pests.
powders can be mixed with water.
The pesticides can be broadly classified into
three groups based on how they act on insects. iii) Granules (G): Dry formulations in which
poisons are mixed with calcium or gypsum in
Contact and stomach poison: When insect
granulated form. Main merit of this formulation
comes into contact or when the insect eats the pesti-
is handling will be easy, it is not carried away by
cide sprayed parts, it gets killed. Contact and stom-
the wind and it is less toxic to plants.
ach poison is used for controlling larvae that feed
on leaves. Examples include Flubendamide. Some iv) Liquid forms, Soluble Liquids (SL), Emulsifi-
of the pesticides derived from plants also have con- able Concentrates (EC), and Soluble Concentrates
tact action, for example pyrethrum, sabadilla, etc. (SC): Liquid forms of pesticides. Since the pesti-
cides are directly soluble in water, they are mixed
with organic solvents, EC formulations disperse
in water easily as they are mixed with emulsifi-
ers.
v) Fumigants: are the poisons in gas form.
Normally it is used to fumigate godowns, grains,
storage rooms and ships even for rat control.
vi) Poison baits: Poisons mixed with food mate-
rial. The latter acts as attractants. Baits are exclu-
sively used to control rats. As the rats are more
sensitive, pre baiting is necessary.
Manual Pesticide Spraying
Systemic poison: When the chemical is sprayed 3.8. Types of chemicals
on the plant, it is absorbed by the plant and trans-
• Organochlorines, Organophosphates, Carba-
ferred to the entire plant system. Sucking type of
mates, Synthetic Pyrethroids are types of chem-
pest like aphids, leafhoppers thrips suck the sap
icals which were used before, but are not rec-
from plants. This kind of sucking pests can be con-
ommended now.
trolled by systemic poison like Imidacloprid (To
• New Molecules: Invention is a continuous pro-
be used with caution), flubendamide, acetamiprid,
cess to identify more effective and less hazardous
thiamethoxam, etc.
chemical search for better insect management.
1) Fumigant: Forms vapour and acts on breath- Examples include Nicotinamides, spinozids,
ing system of the insects. When insects breathe triazoles (Hexaconozole, Propiconozole).
it, they get killed. Examples include, hydrogen
cyanamide, sulfuryl fluoride, etc.
Insecticides are poisons which cannot be used di-
rectly. They need to be used as per directions given
on the container or as per the recommendation of
extension workers. Insecticides are available in dif-
ferent forms of which some are:
75
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.9. Sprayers/Dusters:
Types of applicators
Based on what to apply
• Sprayers are used to sprinkle the soluble chemicals.
• Dusters are used to spread the dust formulation of the pesticide.
Based on power source
• Manually operated sprayers/duster
• Power operated sprayers/duster
• Fuel operated
• Battery operated
• Solar panel powered operated
• Self propelled; i.e. they have their own power source for movement
• Normally 50 -100 litres of spray fluid are required for an acre. If we use manually operated sprayers
200-250 litres of spray fluid are required to cover an acre.
• There are a number of models with a variety of features available in the market. One can choose the
model depending upon the requirement. Each instrument has got its own merits and demerits.
• Nozzle is the terminal part of the sprayer, which delivers the spray liquid to the plants. Different types
of nozzles are available for different purpose.
Types of sprayer
Battery Operated Sprayer Rocker Sprayer:
Capacity 16 litres A minimum of 3 persons are necessary. One per-
Battery 12V/8AH (Fuse:6A) son to use the lever to create pressure and other
Maintenance free Power Battery persons to spray.
Charger: Input: 220V/50HZ
Output: 12V/1000MA
Nozzle: Single, Double
76
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Motorized Power Sprayer is used for spray- Battery Operated Power Sprayer meant for
ing of vegetable and ornamental crops in a large use in the field.
area.
3.10. Integrated Pest Management Tobacco decoction
(IPM)
This is very effective for controlling aphids infesting
vegetable crops. Tobacco decoction can be prepared
"IPM is a sustainable approach for managing
by steaming 500 gm of tobacco in 4.5 litres of water
pests by combining biological, cultural, physi-
for 24 hours. Then, 320 gm of ordinary sliced bar
cal and chemical tools in a way that minimizes eco-
soap is dissolved separately in another vessel. The
nomic, health, and environmental risks."
soap solution is added to tobacco decoction and the
stock solution is diluted 6 - 7 times.
Neem seed suspension
This is very effective as a repellent against locusts
and grasshoppers. Kernels of mature neem fruits
should be crushed into a coarse powder. For obtain-
ing 0.1% concentration, 1 g of powdered neem seed
is required for a litre of water. The required quantity
of the coarse powder should be put in a small bag
of muslin cloth and dipped in water contained in
a bucket and squeezed till the water becomes light
brownish. This has to be sprayed on crops.
3.11. Some insecticidal materials for
The latest registered chemicals are available in www.
common household use
cibrc.nic.in or please verify with extension officer.
Kerosene emulsion
This is a contact insecticide useful against many
sucking insects. Finely divide 500 g of ordinary bar
soap and dissolve it in 4.5 litres of boiling water.
Cool and add 9 litres of kerosene. The mixture is
then vigorously agitated until the oil is completely
emulsified. The stock solution can be diluted with
15-20 times of water before spraying.
77
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
II. Disease Management
3.12. Disease the potential for a disease epidemic.
Dissemination refers to the spread or dispersal of
Disease is an impairment of the normal state
the pathogen from an inoculum source to a host.
of a plant that interrupts or modifies its vital
Dissemination can occur by wind, splashing rain,
functions. All species of plants, wild and cultivated
insects, infested pruning tools, infected or infested
alike are subject to disease. Although each species
transplants, and other means. Spread can occur
is susceptible to characteristic diseases, these are, in
over short distances within the tree canopy or from
each case, relatively few in number. The occurrence
distant sources.
and prevalence of plant diseases vary from season
to season, depending on the presence of the patho-
Primary infection occurs when the pathogen comes
gen, environmental conditions, and the crops and
into contact with a susceptible host under favour-
varieties grown. Some plant varieties are particu-
able environmental conditions. Pathogens pene-
larly subject to outbreaks of diseases.
trate the surface of a plant directly or enter through
wounds or natural openings.
Disease of crops and their importance
Growth and development of a pathogen usually oc-
• Plant become diseased when it is continuously
curs on or within infected plant tissue.
disturbed by some causal agent including an
abnormal process that disrupts the plants. Secondary infection results from spores or cells
• There are more than 80,000 plant diseases. produced following primary infection or from
• Diseases reduce the yield of the crops and other secondary infections. The secondary infec-
sometimes lead to disaster e.g. late blight of po- tion cycle can be repeated many times during the
tato, Panama of banana, etc. growing season. The number of cycles is dependent
• Managing outbreak of diseases is challenge to on the biology of the pathogen and its host and the
the farmer. duration of environmental conditions needed for
infection.
Causes of plant disease
Over wintering or over seasoning is the ability of
Infectious diseases: caused due to fungi, bacte- a pathogen to survive from one growing season to
ria, viruses, nematodes, etc. the next. Pathogens of apple survive the winter in a
number of different ways.
Non-infectious diseases: caused due to unfa-
For a plant disease to occur, a susceptible host, a
vourable extraneous condition such as scorching
pathogen (casual agent), and favourable environ-
sunlight, high temperature, moisture stress or defi-
mental conditions must be present and interact
ciency of micronutrients, pH, heavy metal toxicity,
with one another. If any one of these requirements
atmospheric pollution, etc.
is not met, a plant disease will not occur. At pre-
3.13. The disease cycle sent, our ability to manipulate the environment is
limited to only a few practices such as pruning to
The main events of stages comprising the disease
promote drying, bedding to improve soil drainage,
cycle include the following: production and
and scheduling of irrigation. Severe disease out-
dissemination of the primary inoculum, primary
breaks can be prevented by manipulating the host -
infection, growth and development of the patho-
through the use of resistant cultivars - and the path-
gen, secondary infection and over wintering.
ogen -- through cultural practices and fungicidal or
bactericidal sprays.
The primary inoculum is the part of the pathogen
(that is, bacterial or fungal spores or fungal myce-
lium) that over winters (over-seasons) and causes
the first infection of the season, known as primary
infection. In general, the greater the amount of in-
oculum and the nearer it is to its host, the greater
78
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.14. Disease control measures of important crops
Crops Disease Symptoms Control Measures
Banana 1. Siga- On leaves small light yellow or brown- Remove affected leaves and burn.
toka leaf ish green narrow streaks appear. They
Spray any one of the following fungi-
spot enlarge in size becomes linear, oblong,
cides commencing from November
brown to black spots with dark brown
at monthly interval-difenoconazole
brand and yellow halo.
(2ml/litre), azoxystrobin (2ml/litre),
Black specks of fungal fructification Copper oxychloride 2.5 g/lit.
appear in the affected leaves. Rapid
Alternation of fungicides for every
drying and defoliation of the leaves.
spray prevents fungicidal resistance.
Always add 5 ml of wetting agent like
Sandovit, Triton AE, Teepol etc. per 10
lit of spray fluid.
2. An- The skin at the distal ends of the fin- Spray copper oxychloride 0.25% or
thracnose gers turn black, shrivels. Bordeaux mixture 1%.
The fungus produces masses of conidia Post harvest dipping of fruits in
which form a pinkish coat. difenoconazole (2ml/litre).
The entire fruit and bunch is affected
in severe cases.
Sometimes main stalk of bunch dis-
eased. The bunch becomes black and
rotten.
Acervuli produces cylindrical conidi-
ophores, hyaline, septate, branched.
Conidia hyaline, non-septate, oval to
elliptical.
3. Dark broken bands of green tissues on Spray Methyl Demeton 2 ml/lit to
Bunchy- the veins, leaves and petioles. control it. The sprays may be directed
top towards crown and pseudostem base
Plants are extremely stunted.
upto ground level at 21 days interval
Leaves are reduced in size marginal
atleast thrice.
chlorosis and curling.
Leaves upright and become brittle.
Many leaves are crowded at the top.
Branches size will very small. If infect-
ed earlier no bunch will be produced.
The disease is transmitted primarily by
infected suckers.
Secondary spread is through the aphid
vector.
79
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Crops Disease Symptoms Control Measures
Banana 4. Panama Yellowing of the lower most leaves Uproot and destroy severely affected
cont... disease starting from margin to midrib of the plants.
leaves.
Apply lime at 1 – 2 kg in the pits after
Yellowing extends upwards and finally removal of the affected plants. In
heartleaf alone remains green for some the field, Panama wilt disease can be
time and it is also affected. prevented by corm injection methods.
A small portion of soil is removed to
The leaves break near the base and
expose the upper portion of the corm.
hang down around pseudostem.
An oblique hole at 45° angle is made to
Longitudinal splitting of pseudostem.
a depth of 10 cm. Capsule application
Discolouration of vascular vessels as
for 50 mg of Pseudomonas fluoresces
red or brown streaks.
is injected into the hole with the help
The fungus spreads through use of of ‘corm injector’ on 2nd, 4th and 6th
infected rhizomes. month after planting.
Continuous cultivation results in build
up of inoculum.
Mango 1. Pow- It attacks the leaves, flowers, stalks of Application of Sulphur dust (350
dery panicle and fruits. mesh) in the early morning will pro-
mildew tect new flush or spraying Wettable
Shedding of infected leaves occurs
sulphur 0.2% will control powdery
when the disease is severe.
mildew.
The affected fruits do not grow in size
& may drop before attaining pea size.
2. An- Produces leaf spots, blossom blight, Pre-harvest spraying of Thiophanate
thracnose wither tip, twigs blight and fruit rot. methyl 1g/lit 3 times at 15 days inter-
and stalk val will control anthracnose and stalk
Small blister like spots develop on the
end-rot end-rot.
leaves and twigs.
Young leaves wither and dry Tender
twigs wither and die back symptom
appears.
Affected branches ultimately dry up.
Black spots appear on fruits.
The fruit pulp becomes hard, crack
and decay at ripening. Infected fruits
drop.
3. Sooty The fungi produce mycelium which Spraying thiamethoxam @ 2 ml/ litre
mould is superficial and dark. They row on + Maida 5% (1 kg Maida or starch)
sugary secretions of the plant hoppers. boiled with 1 lit of water and diluted to
Black encrustation is formed which 20 litres will control the incidence of
affect the photosynthetic activity. sooty mould.
The fungus grows on the leaf surface Avoid spraying during cloudy weather.
on the sugary substances secreted by
jassids, aphids and scale insects.
80
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Crops Disease Symptoms Control Measures
Mango 4. Mango The dark epicarp around the base of Apply plant growth regulators (NAA/
cont... malfor- the pedicel. GA/Ethephon @ 50-200ppm) at Bud
mation Inception stage.
In the initial stage the affected area en-
larges to form a circular, black patch. Harvest mangoes on clear dry day.
Under humid atmosphere extends Injury should be avoided to fruits at all
rapidly and turns the whole fruit com- stages of handling.
pletely black within two or three days.
The pulp becomes brown and some-
what softer.
Dead twigs and bark of the trees,
spread by rains.
Cotton 1. Seed- Seed-rot, root-rot, pre emergence and- Fungicide seed treatments help con-
ling post emergence damping-off. trol seed rots and some pre emergence
diseases damping off. However, an additional
(seed-rot, soil treatment of fungicide must be
rootrot, used to control root-rots and most
and damping-off. In addition, producers
damping must follow all other recommended
off cotton production practices to de-
crease seedling diseases. Some of
these practices include use of correct
planting equipment and date of plant-
ing, good seed bed preparation, cor-
rect use of herbicides and insecticides
and use of high germinating seed.
2. Fusari- Plants become stunted, yellowed, fol- Reduce nematode population. Crop
um wilt lowed by defoliation. Yellowing first rotations. Use resistant varieties.
occurs around leaf edges and advances
inward. Cross sections of infected
stems usually reveals a brown Discol-
oration which is more intense in outer
layers of tissue. Infected plants fruit
earlier and produce smaller boll.
3. Boll rot Boll rots usually first appear as water Avoid excessive rates of nitrogen.
soaked spots. Later, as infection- Practice skip-row planting. Timely de-
spreads, bolls turn black and may be- foliation will reduce boll rots. Reduce
covered with a moldy fungus growth. insects which injure bolls. Growth
regulators such as Pix can be used ef-
Badly infected bolls may drop from-
fectively to reduce boll rots.
plant.
81
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Crops Disease Symptoms Control Measures
Cotton 4. Leaf Various types of leaf spots and blights. Use fungicide seed treatments. De-
cont... spot stroy crop residues. Use crop rotations
Many spots occur on leaves toward
and plant resistant varieties when
maturity, but these are not usually
available (esp. when Bacterial Blight is
damaging to the plant at this stage of
severe).
growth.
Keep potash levels at least medium to
high.
5. Verti- Seedlings may become infected and Plant resistant varieties when Verti-
cillium turn yellow, dry out and die. Plants cillium Wilt is severe. A variety that
wilt that become infected later in the sea- matures very early may in some years
son are stunted and exhibit a yellow escape injury from Verticillium Wilt.
condition along leaf margins and be-
tween the major vein. Severely affected
plants will shed their leaves. A brown
Discoloration of the interior of the
stem can usually be found later in the
season. This discoloration is.
Distributed evenly across the inside of
the stem.
Citrus 1. Root Rotted roots, cracked bark, accom- Two sprays with drenching either by
rot, foot panied by gumming Water-soaked, Fosetyl-Al (2.5g/L)or Metalaxyl MZ-
rot and reddish-brown to black bark at the soil 72(2.75g/1 water covering the whole
gummosis line Discoloured tissue in the lower plant canopy and basin of affected
trunk; yellowing, sparse foliage and plant at 40 days interval after onset of
death of the tree. monsoon provided significant control
.For the control of gummosis, scraping
of the affected parts followed by appli-
cation of Metalaxyl2 MZ-72 paste.
2. Citrus Disease affecting citrus species that Pruning and destruction of infected
canker is caused by the bacterial Infection twigs followed by three to four sprays
causes lesions on the leaves, stems, and with copper oxychloride (COC) 0.3%
fruit of citrus trees. While not harmful + streptocycline 100 ppm at monthly
to humans, canker significantly af- intervals after the onset of monsoon.
fects the vitality of citrus trees, causing
leaves and fruit to drop prematurely.
82
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Crops Disease Symptoms Control Measures
Citrus 3. Citrus Symptoms vary with the cause of Good cultural practices, improvement
cont... decline the malady. The affected trees do not in soil fertility and drainage, control
always die completely, but remain in a of insect pests, nematodes, etc. may
state for decandance and unproductive be useful to minimize the incidence of
for a number of years. decline. Use of resistant rootstocks and
certified budwood for propagation is
Some-times they may suddenly wilt
also useful.
and die in a day or two. In early stages,
Symptoms are restricted to a few
limbs, but eventually the whole tree is
involved. Trees show sparse mottling
leaves, stunted growth, sickly appear-
ance. Midrib and lateral veins of old,
mature leaves turn yellow with in-
terveinal areas along the veins showing
diffuse yellowing.
Leaves may turn yellow and are shed
with the onset of summer or autumn
and the die-back of twigs starts. Dead
shoots stand out prominently and
may be found dead right down to the
main trunk. The entire tree bears short
twigs carrying narrow small leaves
on their lower portion. Subsequent
secondary growth consists of short,
upright small, weak shoots showing
a variety of discolouration of leaves.
Often these leaves have green veins of
green blotches. Occasionally, small,
circular, green spots appear on yel-
low tissue on leaves. The die-back of
weak shoots continues. There is exces-
sive flowering, but the fruits are not
carried to maturity. The fruits show
distinct sun-blotching. The feeder root
system becomes depleted, roots turn
black and sometimes are covered with
rotting bark. Either only a few trees or
entire orchard may be affected.
83
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.15 Concept of Seed Treatment The benefits of seed treatment are as follows:
• Increased germination
The concept of seed treatment is the use and • Ensures uniform seedling emergence.
application of biological and chemical agents • Protect seeds or seedlings from early season
that control or contain primary soil and seed borne diseases and insect pests improving crop emer-
infestation of insects and diseases which pose dev- gence and its growth.
astating consequences to crop production and im- • Use of plant growth hormones may enhance
proving crop safety leading to good establishment of crop performance during the growing season.
healthy and vigorous plants resulting better yields. • Rhizobium inoculation enhances the nitrogen fixing
capability of legume crops, and their productivity.
• Improved plant population and thus higher
productivity.
Pest/Disease Seed Treatment Remarks
Root rot, wilt Trichoderma spp. 4-6 gm/kg. seed. For seed dressing metalseed dresser
/ earthern pots or polythene bags
are used.
Root rot disease Trichoderma 5-10 gm/kg. seed (before -do-
transplanting).
Bacterial sheath Pseudomonas flourescens 0.5% W.P. 10
blight gm/kg.
White tip nematode Seed soaking in 0.2% solution. -do-
Anthracnose spp. Seed treatment with Trichoderma viri- -do-
de4g/kg.
Damping off
Soil borne infection Trichoderma viride @ 2 gm/kg. seed and -do-
of fungal disease Pseudomonas flourescens,@10gm/kg.
Captan 75 WS @ 1.5 to 2.5 gm a.i./litre
for soil drenching.
Jassid, aphid, thrips Imidacloprid 70 WS @ 10-15 gm a.i./kg
seed (To be used in proper doses under
guidance of an agriculture expert).
Wilt, blight and root Trichoderma spp. @ 4 gm/kg. seed. For seed dressing metal seed dress-
brot er/earthern pots or polythene bags
are used.
Root knot nematode Paecilomyces lilacinusand Pseudomonas - do-
fluorescens @ 10 gm/kg as seed dresser.
Soil borne infection T. viride @ 2 gm/100gmseed. For seed dressing metal seed dress-
of fungal disease er/earthern pots or polythene bags
Captan 75 WS @ 1.5 to 2.0 gm a.i./litre
are used.
Early blight for soil drenching.
Damping off Pseudomonas fluorescens and V. clamyd-
osporium @ 10gm/kg as seeddresser
Wilt
84
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Bacterial wilt Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10gm/kg. -do-
Pest/Disease Seed Treatment Remarks
Seed rot Trichoderma viride @ 6 gm/kg seed. -do-
Jassids, whitefly Thiamethoxam (0.2gm/litre of water)
Termite Treat the seed before sowing with any one For seed dressing metal seed dresser
of the following insecticides. / earthern pots or polythene bags
are used.
i) Chlorpyriphos @ 4 ml/kg seed (Best
available option and use with caution).
Bunt/false smut/ Carboxin 75 % WP.
loose smut/covered
Tebuconazole 2 DS @ 1.5 to 1.87 gm a.i.
smut
per kg seed.
T. viride 1.15 % WP @ 4 gm/kg.
Wilt and damping off Seed treatment with Trichoderma viridi
1% WP @ 9 gm/kg seeds.
Soil and tuber borne Seed treatment with boric acid 3% for 20
diseases minuts before storage.
3.16. Nematode management populations build up more slowly. Thus, cool sea-
son crops are less likely to be damaged. E.g., early
Nematodes are thread-like roundworms in- spring potatoes, are rarely damaged by nematodes.
visible to the naked eye. Species parasitic on
plants attack roots and other plant parts, causing Nematode management practices
stunting and yield reduction. Nematode-infected
plants are not only weakened but their root systems Isolation: Once a nematode problem is confirmed,
are more susceptible to secondary infections by affected areas and plants should be isolated because
fungi or bacteria. transplants, machinery and irrigation water can all
spread nematode infections. From initially small-
Correct identification is the first step when a nem-
infested areas, nematodes can spread across a field
atode problem is suspected. The second step is to
at a rate of 3 feet per year.
determine whether populations are high enough to
threaten the crop. Root knot nematodes, the most Crop rotation and cover crops: Crops suscep-
common pathogenic nematodes in vegetables, can- tible to root knot nematodes include all cole crop
not penetrate roots when soil temperatures are species, beans, cucumber, muskmelon, watermelon,
below 50 degrees F, and will not reproduce when bendi, potato, sweet potato and tomato. All pota-
soil temperatures are below 58 degrees F. Their re- toes are susceptible to nematodes except for a few
productive rate is slower at cooler temperatures, so cultivars resistant to the golden nematode.
85
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Rotation to non-host crops such as corn, cucurbits, Some of the disease symptoms are:
potatoes and tomatoes is an effective control for the
cyst nematode. But is less likely to control the root
knot nematode because of its wider host range. All
species of Meloidogyne are called 'root knot' nema-
tode but each species has a different host range,
causing confusion over which crops or cultivars are
resistant or tolerant to which species of root knot
Altenaria leaf spot of redgram
nematode. Rotations to non-host crops for more
than a year reduce populations below damaging
levels but will not eliminate them.
Cover crops: significantly reduce subsequent
damage to crop.
Increasing Soil Organic Matter: Higher soil
organic matter content protects plants against nem-
atodes by increasing soil water-holding capacity Wilt affected redgram plant
and enhancing the activity of naturally-occurring
biological organisms that compete with nematodes
in the soil.
Fallow Period: A fallow period of two years
with no susceptible plants in the field decreases
nematode populations. Marigold as a rotation
crop suppress nematodes.
Red rot in sugarcane
Plant resistance: Nematode resistant cultivars
may be used to reduce the incidence of nematodes
Symptoms
• Understanding symptom and description of
disease will help in identification at field level.
Ratoon stunting in sugarcane
Blast infected leaf of paddy
Anthracnose in cotton
Bacterial blight of paddy Gray mould in cotton
86
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.17. Control measures - Tips for the • Avoid planting the same crop in a field year af-
ter year. E.g.:
farmers
I) Growing paddy in the Veriticillium wilt in-
• Correct identification of disease in your farm is fested field will reduce the incidence of micro-
essential for effective control of disease. bial population in the soil.
• With little experience, you can identify the dis- II) Growing Chrysanthemum will inhibit the
ease. However you can contact agricultural of- growth of the Veriticillium in the soil.
ficers of your area along with disease specimen • Incorporate the crop residues of the previous
and seek their help in identifying the disease. crop by tilling well before planting season. E.g.
• You can also give disease-affected plant parts to Disease affected plants should be burnt imme-
the Agri clinics for clinical test before under- diately.
taking control measures. • Choose right sowing time and maintain ap-
• Follow Integrated Diseases Management such propriate plant population by adopting recom-
as host plant resistance, agronomic practices, mended spacing.
judicious use of fungicides, pesticides for vec- • Apply a balanced fertilizers based on a soil test.
tor control, bio-pesticides for pathogen control E.g.: Potassium deficiency leads to susceptibil-
etc., as indicated below. ity of Alternaria leaf spot.
• Apply recommended amount of Farmyard Ma-
3.18. Integrated disease management
nures/compost at regular intervals and main-
practices in the field tain soil-organic matter content. E.g.: Over
dose of chemical fertilisers lead to more vegeta-
• Select varieties and hybrids resistant to the
tive growth and more disease.
most common or economically important dis-
• Enrich soil with beneficial micro-organisms
eases in consultation with agricultural officers
like Trichoderma.
of your area.
• Keep the land weed free. Weeds can serve as
For example: alternate hosts for pathogens and helps disease
development.
Diseases of Cotton Resistant Variety/Hybrid • Timing and duration of irrigation should match
the crop and water requirement without allow-
Verticillium Wilt MCU 5 VT, Surabhi, Savi-
ing for excess water. E.g.: Excessive irrigation
tha (Hybrid)
favour soil borne pathogen
Bacterial Leaf Blight MCU 10, L 604, L 389
• Maintain insect population below ETL to re-
duce the incident of disease transfer by insects.
• Regular crop monitoring is essential for effec-
• Plant only good quality, disease-free seed hav-
tive disease management.
ing good germination. E.g. Cotton seed hav-
• Use bio-pesticide as far as possible to control
ing above 80% germination will have vigorous
disease. Chemical may be used only as last re-
growth and will not suffer from infection of soil
sort.
borne diseases
• Use seed-treatment with fungicides to control
diseases.
• Plant when soil temperature and moisture are
most favourable for specific crop. E.g: If the
farmers take up sowing of cotton during the
warmer temperature (>65 F), there will be bet-
ter germination and growth.
87
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
III. Weed Management
3.19. Weed and its relevance in crop 3.20. Critical period of weed compe-
production tition for important crops
• Weeds are the plants, which grow where they
Crops Days from sowing
are not wanted
• Weeds compete with crops for water, soil nutri- Rice (lowland) 35
ents, light and space
Rice (upland) 60
• Weeds reduce crop yields to the extent of up to
50 percent Sorghum 30
• Critical period of weed competition is approxi-
Maize 30
mately 1/3rd of the duration of the crop
Cotton 35
Characteristics of weeds: “One year
Sugarcane 90
seeding, seven years weeding”
Groundnut 45
• Produces larger number of seeds compared to
Soybean 45
crops. E.g.: Amaranthus retroflexus produces
1,96,405 seeds/plant, whereas wheat & rice pro- Onion 60
duces only 90 to 100 seeds/plant
Tomato 30
• Most of the weed seeds are small in size
• Easy and diverse means of seed dispersion
• Seeds germinate earlier and grow faster
• Flower earlier and mature ahead of the crop
• Germinate under tough conditions, season
bound
• Seeds are dormant for long period and germi-
nate during suitable season
• Good viability for years
• Tolerate moisture stress
• Possess stronger and deeper root system
Effect of weed competition on crop
growth and yield
• Crop suffers from nutritional deficiency
• Growth is reduced
• Water requirement will be more
• Lowers the input response
• Pest and disease incidence will be more
• Yield is affected
• Cost of production will increase
88
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.21. Different types of common weeds
89
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
90
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Source: Directorate of Weed Science Research, Jabalpur
91
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.22. Control measures of weeds always possible in crop production field.
• Flooding: Kills weeds by reducing oxygen to
Principles of weed control plant growth. This is possible only under gar-
den land or wetland condition.
• Prevention
• Eradication Merits of mechanical method
• Control • Oldest and effective method
• Management • Safe method for environment
• High skill is not necessary
a) Preventive weed control
• Weeding is possible in between plants
• Avoid using crop that are infested with weed
• Deep rooted weeds can be controlled effec-
seeds for sowing
tively
• Avoid adding weeds to the manure pits
Demerits of mechanical method
• Nursery or planting material should be free
• Labour and time consuming
from weeds
• Possibility of crop damage
• Keep irrigation channels, fence-lines and un-
• Requires ideal moisture
cropped areas clean
• Costly
• Constantly look for weed, destroy the weeds
then and there
ii) Cultural weed control
• Use good quality certified seeds, which are free
• Summer ploughing: Is done immediately af-
from weed seeds
ter summer showers. This exposes weeds to
• Use pre-emergence herbicides to prevent ger-
hot sun.
mination of weeds
• Field preparation: Makes the field weed free
b) Eradication (complete removal): Weeds are by constant removal.
• Select crop that can compete better with
killed or completely removed from a given area, will
weeds like cowpea, sudan gross, sorghum are
not reappear unless it is introduced again. However,
good competitors. Fast growing crops sup-
• It is very difficult
presses the weed effectively.
• Involves high cost
• Maintenance of optimum plant population:
• Can be used in green houses and nurseries
Adequate plant population covers the land
c) Control: Weeds growth is restricted and killed and, hence, growth of the weed will be dif-
when necessary so that it does not affect crop ficult. Close row crops are better than wide
growth. row.
• Crop rotation: Minimize the dominance of
d) Weed management: Managing the population
particular weed in the cropping system.
of weeds using all possible methods.
• Growing of intercrops: Inter cropping cov-
(i) Mechanical method: ers the land quickly and reduce growth of
the weeds. E.g,: Growing crop such as cow-
• Tillage: Using plough or disc, weeds are re-
pea/ soybean, etc. in wide spaced crops like
moved from soil and exposed to sunlight.
maize/pigeon pea/sugar cane, etc.
• Hoeing: Using hand hoe, annual and bienni-
• Mulching: Mulch is a protective covering
als are completely removed.
of material maintained on soil surface. It
• Hand weeding: Either by physical removal or
has smothering effect and reduces the weed
pulling out of weeds by hand or using some
growth. Mulching can be done through de-
implements.
gradable farm waste or through plastic sheets.
• Digging: Advisable in the case of perennial
In case of plastic, black is the most popular
weeds.
colour used in commercial horticulture crop
• Using sickle: Top portion of weeds are re-
production, especially for weed control.
moved using sickle, thereby weeds seed pro-
• Solarisation: Done by covering the pre soaked
duction is controlled.
field with transparent polythene cover, which
• Burning: Burning is often an economical and
increases the temperature by 5 – 10 ºC.
practical means of controlling weeds but not
92
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
• Stale seedbed: Weeds are allowed to germi- • Controls the targeted weeds only
nate and non-residual herbicide is sprayed • Controls many perennial weed species
to kill the young weed seedlings. • Cost effective compared to labour
• Blind tillage: Ploughing after sowing of the
Demerits
crop and before plants emerge. Normally
• Pollutes the environment
seed drills are used under rainfed condition
• Affects the soil
for this purpose.
• Herbicide drift affects adjoining field
• Crop management practices: Vigorous and
• Requires minimum technical knowledge
fast growing crop varieties for better compe-
• Leaves residual effects
tition with weeds.
• Some herbicides are costly
Merits of cultural method • No suitable herbicides are available for
• Low cost mixed and inter-cropping system
• Easy to adopt
3.23. Classification of herbicides
• Less technical skill is sufficient
• No damage to crops
Method Soil herbicides; e.g: Fluchloralin
• Effective weed control
of appli-
Foliar herbicide: e.g. Glyphosate
Demerits of cultural method cation
• Time taking and difficult Mode of Selective herbicide: Kills only weeds.
• Perennial and problematic weeds can not be action
controlled
Non selective herbicide: Kills the entire
iii) Biological weed control: Natural enemy vegetation.
of a weed plant is used to control the weed Mobility Contact herbicide; Kills when comes
in contact with plant.
Examples:
• Zygogramma biolorata for control of Par- Translocated herbicide: poison moves
thenium from treated parts to untreated part:
• Hirsch – Manniella spinicaudata is a rice Eg. Glyphosate
root nematode to control most upland rice Time of Pre-plant: Before sowing or along
weeds applica- sowing
• Azolla in rice tion Eg. Glyphosate for Hariyali, Basalin
for groundnut
Advantages
• Eco friendly
• Easy
• Low cost
Pre emergence: Before weeds
Disadvantages germinate;Eg. Thiobencarb
• They may have alternate host or switching
over to alternate host
• Multiplication of bio agent in many cases is
difficult Post emergence: applied after weeds
germinate
iv) Chemical Weed Control: Herbicides are
i) Eg. Bispyribac Sodium.
chemicals used to control weeds.
Merits
• Recommended for adverse soil and climatic
conditions
• Applied even before weeds emerge and
make the environment weed free
• Suitable for all types of crops
93
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.25. Control of parthenium (peren-
Formula- Emulsifiable Concentrate (EC): Liquid
tions form. nial weed)
Wettable powders: Poisons mixed with
• Manual removal and destruction of Partheni-
inert carrier.
um plants before flowering using hand glouse/
Granules (G) poisons are mixed with machineries (or)
granular forms. • Uniform spraying of sodium chloride 200g + 2
ml soap oil/litre of water (or)
Water Soluble Concentrates (WSC)
• Spraying of 2,4-D sodium salt 8 g or glypho-
forms are also available
sate10 ml + 20g ammonium sulphate + 2 ml
soap solution/litre of water before flowering
(or)
3.24. Methods of application • Post-emergence application of metribuzin 3 g /
litre of water under non-crop situation.
• Spraying
• Raising competitive plants like Cassia serecea
• Broadcasting
and Abutilon indicum on fallow lands to re-
place Parthenium (or)
Foliar application
• Biological control by Mexican beetle, fungal
pathogen and nematodes
Blanket spray: Both crop and weed is sprayed
with weedicide.
3.26. Control of perennial weeds in
orchards
Perennial weeds like Cyperus rotundus, cynodon
dactylon, etc. in orchards can be controlled ef-
fectively by spraying glyphosate1 at 2.5 to 5.0 L ha-1
dissolved in 500 liters of water. Falling of the spray
fluid on young fruit plant foliage should be avoided.
Second spray is required when there is re-growth of
weed. (Cost Rs.700/- to 1400 ha).
3.27. Precautions while spraying the
herbicides
• Select right kind of herbicide for right kind of
Blanket Spray crop and spray. Any mistake in choosing the
herbicide may result in loss of total crop.
• Dosage should be accurate and good quality of
Directed spray: Application of herbicides on
water should be used.
weeds only avoiding crop using hood.
• Use always correct nozzle for spraying. Spray-
Eg: Spraying glyphosate1 in between rows of tapioca ing should be done from front to backwards.
using hood to control Hariyali. (We should not step into the sprayed field for a
minimum of 3 days).
Protected spray: Crops are covered and herbi- • The soil should have sufficient moisture for ef-
fective control.
cides are sprayed on weeds. This method is expen-
• For paddy, a thin film of water should be main-
sive.
tained for 3 days and it should not be drained.
Spot treatment: Applied only where weeds are
present.
94
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.28. List of Herbicides for different crops
* There may be slight variation in doses. Please consult local Agricultural Extension Officer/Scien-
tists from KVK or read carefully the leaflet attached along with the herbicide:
Crop Herbicide Dose (kg ai/ha) Trade name and for- Time of application
mulation
Rice Thiobencarb 1.25 Machete 50% EC Pre-emergence
Delchlor 50% EC
Anilophos 0.40 Thunder 50% EC Pre-emergence
Saturn 50% EC
Pendimethalin 0.90 Arozin 30% EC Pre-emergence
Aniloguard 30% EC
Finger millet Pendimethalin 0.90 Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
2,4-D Na salt 1.00 Fernoxone 80% SS Post-emergence
Maize Pendimethalin 0.75 Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Cotton Metolachlor 1.00 Dual 50% EC Pre-emergence
Pendimethalin 1.00 Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Groundnut Metolachlor 1.00 Dual 50% EC Pre-emergence
Pendimethalin 0.90 Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Vegetables Pendimethalin 1.00 Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Pulses Pendimethalin 0.60 Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Wheat Isoproturon 0.60 Arelon 75% WP Pre-emergence
Citrus Glyphosate 4 4 Kg/ha Post-emergence
3.29. Herbicide mixtures Mixing Ammonium sulphate with glyphosate in-
creases the efficiency where nitrogen increases the
Sometimes involves mixing of two or more her- translocation.
bicides used for effective and economical weed
control at reduced dosage. 3.30. Integrated Weed Management
(IWM)
Two types of mixtures available are:
Combination of two or more weed control
1. Tank mixtures made with the desired propor-
methods at low input levels to reduce weed
tion of herbicides before application. eg: An-
composition in a given cropping system below the
ilophos + Bispyribac Sodium – Rice
economic threshold level. It:
2. Ready mix – formulated by the manufacturer.
Ready mix available in the world market eg:
• Aims to minimize the residue problems
Bispyribac Sodium+Glyphosate.
• Minimize the effect on the ecosystem
95
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
3.31. Beneficial Effects of Weeds or • Agropyron repense are used for soil conserva-
tion, whereas Dicanthium Annulatum are used
Economic Uses of Weeds
as stabilizing field bunds.
Several weeds have been put to certain economic • Opuntia Dellini is used as biological fence.
uses since ages. Some of the examples are:
• Typha and Saccharum sp is used for making
ropes and thatch boards. 3.34. Lessons Learnt
• Chicory Cichorium intybus roots are used for
1. Not all insects are harmful. Farmers need
adding flavor to coffee powder.
to identify beneficial and harmful insects.
• Amaranthus viridis, Chenopodium album and
2. Summer ploughing, growing trap crops,
Portulaca sp. are used as leafy vegetable.
adopting mixed cropping, intercropping,
• Hariyali grass (Cynodon dactylon) and
crop rotation and keeping the field clean
Cenchrus Ciliaris, Dichanthium Annulatum
are the important agronomical practices
andEclipta alba weeds of grass land serve as
farmers needs to follow for effective pest
food for animals.
management.
• Weeds act as alternate host for predators and
3. Farmers need to understand the Economic
parasites of insect pests, which feed on the
Threshold level of major pest of the crops
weeds. For example, Trichogramma chilonis
grown.
feed upon eggs of caster semi looper, which
4. Biological control methods results in sus-
damage the castor plants. E.g. Commelina sp
tainable pest control.
(Copper), Eichornia crassipes (Copper Zinc,
5. Farmers are advised to harvest the fruits
lead and cadmium in water bodies.
and vegetables after the waiting period to
• Several species of weeds like Tephorsia purpu-
minimize the residual effect.
rea and Croton sparsiflora in South India are
6. Seed treatment prevents soil and seed
used as green manures, whereas Eichornia cras-
borne infestation of insects and diseases
sipes and Pistia stratiotes are used for compost-
7. Select varieties and hybrids resistant to
ing.
most common and economically impor-
• Argemone Mexicana is used for reclamation of
tant diseases.
alkali soils.
8. One year seeding, seven years weeding.
• Some weeds have medicinal properties and
Hence, prevent spreading of seeds of
used to cure snake bite (Leucas aspera), gastric
weeds.
troubles (Calotropis procera), skin disorders
(Argemone mexicana) and jaundice (Phyllan-
thus nirur ) and Striga Orobanchioides to con-
trol diabetes.
• Agarbathis (Cyperus rotundus), aromatic oils,
(Andropogan sp & Simbopogon sp) are pre-
pared from weeds.
• Air pollution determined by wild mustard and
chickweed respectively.
• Aquatic weeds are useful in paper, pulp and
fiber industry.
• Chenopodium album is used as mulch to re-
duce evaporation losses, whereas Agropyron
repens (quack grass) is used to control soil ero-
sion because of its prolific root system.
• Weeds like Lantana camara, Amaranthus vir-
idis, Chenopodium Albu and Eichhornia cras-
sipes are used for beautification.
96
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Categories of Pesticides and Precautions
Insecticide Group Label of Toxicity Precaution
Flubendiamide Diamide Category D To be used with Caution.
Emamectin Benzoate Macrocyclic Lactone - Category D To be used with Caution.
Avermectin
Spinosad Macrocyclic Lactone – Category B To be used with great caution
Spinosyn (since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Acetamiprid Neonicotinoids Category D To be used with Caution.
Imidacloprid Neonicotinoids Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Thiamethoxam Neonicotinoids Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Chlorpyriphos Organothiophosphate Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Profenophos Organothiophosphate Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Fenazaquin Unclassified Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Fungicide Group Label of Toxicity Precaution
Thiophanate methyl Benzimidazole Category B To be used with great caution
precursor (since highly hazardous for
human health and/or environ-
ment) and under the guidance
of an Agriculture Expert.
Carboxin Carboxamide/ oxathin Category D To be used with Caution.
Copper oxychloride Inorganic copper Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Fosetyl organophosphorus Category D To be used with Caution.
Captan Phthalimide Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Metalaxyl phenylamide Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Azoxystrobin Strobilurins Category D To be used with Caution.
97
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Plant Protection
Difenoconazole Triazoles Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Triadimefon Triazoles Category B To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.
Tebuconazole Triazoles Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Herbicide Group Label of Toxicity Precaution
2,4-D Chlorophenoxy acid Category C To be used with caution and un-
or ester der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Butachlor Chloroacetanilide Category B To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.
Metolachlor Chloroacetanilide Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Fluchloralin Dinitroaniline Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Pendimethalin Dinitroaniline Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Anilophos Organophosphorus Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Diuron Phenylurea Category B To be used with great caution,
since probably carcinogenic,
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.
Isoproturon Phenylurea Category C To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.
Glyphosate Phosphonoglycine Category B To be used with great caution,
since probably carcinogenic,
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.
Atrazine Triazines Category B To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.
Thiobencarb Thiocarbamate Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.
Metribuzin Triazinone Category B To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.
98
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
4. Farm Management
4.1. Objectives of the session
• To equip the farmer to take advantage of improved technologies and market opportunities to increase
income.
• To assist the farmer to make proper plan and adopts his production to assure food security for the
family.
• To empower the farmer for professional negotiations with buyers, input dealers and credit institutions.
• To educate the farmer to make profitable decisions considering available resources and anticipate risks
including market fluctuations.
4.2. What we know at the end of the session
• Importance of farm management
• Basic information which support better farm management decision
• Market driven enterprises
• Matching resources with calendar of activities
• Selection of cropping pattern
• Understanding of cost benefit analysis
• Risk analysis in agriculture
Module 1: Is farming a business?
What is a farm? Implementation: Efficient implementation with
least cost.
Farm is a socio economic unit. It is composed of
farm family, farm enterprises and structures. Monitoring: Reduce the losses and increase the
Farmer is a grower cum manager. The farmer has profits by reducing the costs and choosing better
to decide how much land, labour, capital and type technologies based on the observed opportunities.
of technology to use to produce in a given season.
Ultimately, the farmer has to earn a profit to sup- Evaluation: Evaluating the actions for repeating
port his livelihood. the succeses in future.
What will the farmer do in farm man- What will happen if the farmer does
agement? not do farm management?
The farmer would efficiently use the available re- In the absence of good farm management, the
sources to increase profits through deciding among farmer may experience losses in farming for the fol-
the best alternatives available. lowing the reasons:
Some basic functions of farm manage- • There is continuous changes in supply and price
of agri inputs like seeds, fertilizers, irrigation,
ment
power etc.
• There is continuous change in prices of the pro-
The farmer performs following basic functions to
duce (outputs) in the market due to demand
effectively manage the farm:
and supply changes.
Diagnosis: Analysis of past performance of farm, • There is continuous change in the farm tech-
its weakness/strengths. nologies.
Planning: Planning for the future crops/animals
considering the opportunities and threats.
99
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Therefore the objectives of farming as a For example: If a farmer maintains a record for all
the cost of production such as inputs, labour, etc.
business are:
for the entire crop cycle along with yield and in-
• How to choose best variety/crop/cropping pat- come obtained from selling the produce, he/she
tern can compare with the next crop cycle to understand
• How to minimise input cost by judicious use whether his/her profit increased or decreased. The
• How to increase the production and productiv- records also provides information on activities
ity which contributed for his/her profit or loss so that,
• How to enhance the quality the farmer can take alternative decisions to enhance
• How to plan market driven production his/her net income.
• Choosing the better source of finance and bet-
ter avenues for investment Farm Resources: To make good farm manage-
• Efficient risk management ment decisions, farmers need some basic knowl-
edge on farm resources such as the extent of land
For better farm management, the farm-
available for cultivation, source of irrigation, family
er should have thorough knowledge of labour, availability of labour, skill level of labours,
livestock, availability of fodder, availability of farm
the following aspects:
machinery, availability of inputs such as seeds
• Farm map and fertilizers, credit requirement and availability,
• Soil slope and topography source of credit, market demand for produce, in-
• Soil type (physical and chemical properties) frastructure such as cold storage and godowns. etc.
• Soil colour such as red soil or black soil For example, regarding manpower and livestock the
• Weather parameter such as rainfall, tempera- farmers have to understand following issue:
ture, relative humidity, etc.
Man Power
• Vegetative cover such as trees, weeds, etc.
• Skill: Is the labour employed is skilled, e.g. cot-
• Irrigation potential from borewell/tubewell/
ton picking skill?
nala/channels
• Knowledge: Does the farmer/labour have a
• Drainage facilities - whether water gets logged
thorough knowledge of the package of practices
or not
of the crop?
• Technology available and whether the farmer
• Attitude: Does he/she have a positive attitude
can access them easily
towards the technology?
• Risk factors like hand loans and high rate of in-
terest
Live Stock
• Market facilities - whether they are near to his
• Breed: Selection of a suitable breed
farm or far off
• Production capacity: For instance, milk produc-
• Communication facilities like cell phone and
tion, meat production and egg laying capacity.
internet connectivity
• Adaptability: Does the selected breed adapt to
• Physical and infrastructure facilities such as
the local situation?
godowns, roads for transport, vehicles, custom
• Drafting capacity: Knowledge on the draught
hiring centers, etc.
capacity of animal.
• Whether a farmer can afford the crop/animal
• Resistance: Is the foreign breeds resistant to lo-
he/she wishes to grow or rear considering the
cal Indian conditions. E.g. the Holstein Fresian
above conditions
is highly sensitive to high temperatures.
• Supporting programmes and schemes/subsi-
• Feeding habit: Are the upgrade breeds or im-
dies
ported breeds capable of feeding on locally
available feed materials
Farmers should maintain farm records
to have a holistic knowledge of their
production system
100
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Module 2: Know your farm resources
Inputs Tools and equipment Labour Money Land
Seeds Plough, hoe, spray- Family and Paid Self finance and Own / Rented land
er, thresher, Tractors workers credit Share-cropping
Fertiliser
Insecticide
Fungicide
What does one need to know about the market if one wants to do good business?
The market for agricultural produce The market for inputs and equipment
The location of the market The locations of sale
Who is the buyer? Who sells the inputs and equipments?
The quality of product that is demanded by the The quality of inputs and equipment
market
The price of the product compared to other mar- The price of sale of the inputs and equipments
kets
When to sell When to buy
How does the price of agricultural products change?
The price of agriculture products change according The price of agriculture products change between
to the season of the year years
At times of abundance, the prices are lowest The price of a product that is needed by more and
more people will rise from one year to the next
At times of scarcity, the prices are highest The price a product that is produced in greater
abundance will fall from one year to the next
The quality of inputs and equipment
The price of sale of the inputs and equipments
When to buy
Important Lesson
To DO successful farm business, the farmer must be well aware of prices (of inputs and produce) at dif-
ferent markets. This allows the farmer to plan production as well as make decisions on the purchase of
inputs and the sale of produce.
Module 3: Manage your farm for enough income to
sustain yourself
FARM PLANNING: Farm planning is to help • Animal component based (diary, poultry, goat-
the farmers to move to a higher level of production ery, piggery, duckery, etc.)
and income, starting from where he/she is now with • Nursery/orchard
the resource available to him/her. In this process, • Non-land based (mushroom, apiculture, ver-
the farmer has to consider different types of enter- miculture, etc.)
prises like:
In the present example, three crops namely paddy,
• Land based (agril. production activities, pisci-
cotton and maize have been taken into comparison
culture, plantation, seed production, etc.)
101
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
for one season. With these three crops, farmers can • Paddy – Paddy (Kharif followed by Rabi)
grow the following combinations in a year: • Paddy – Maize (Kharif followed by Rabi)
• Cotton – Maize (Kharif followed by Rabi)
• Maize – Maize (Kharif followed by Rabi)
Exercise 1: Agricultural Calendar of Operations to Plan the Production of Paddy.
The times of work…
Of the main season are shown by a square
Of the off-season are shown by a circle
The tasks of the farmer
Prepare the field
Plough the field
Purchase seeds
Sow
Fertilizer application
Weeding
Apply insecticide
Harvest and store
Important Lesson:
For a good yield, the farmer plans to do the necessary work in the field and apply the inputs at the right
time based on the calendar of operations throughout the year
Here we will see how to determine if farm business was good or bad. We will calculate the “Income” and
“Expenditure” from different produce. Master Trainers may give the following exercise sheet to the farm-
ers to work out the details for the respective crops by changing the relevant package of practices as appli-
cable to local situations.
102
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
January Feb. March April May June July August Sept. October Nov. Dec.
Farm Management
Exercise Sheet 2: Paddy
Blank sheet to be filled by Farmer based on worked solution given below.
Steps:
• Multiply the quantity with the price in each line
• Add the money spent (“Expenditure”) on inputs and labour
• Multiply the yield by the price of sale (“Income”)
• Subtract the sum of “money-out” from the “Income”
• Determine if there was a gain or a loss
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Preparatory cultivation
a) Machine / labour No of hours
b) Animal / labour Days
Sub Total
Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed Kgs
b) Cost of seed treatment
c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour) Days
d) Cost of thinning/gap filling Days
Sub-Total
Manures and Fertilizers
a) Cost of organic & Green Manuring (In-
situ plouging)
b) Application cost
c) Cost of fertilizer Kgs N
P
K
d) Application cost (Human Labour Male) Days
Sub-Total
Weed control
a) Cost of Manual weeding Labour
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Litre
Sub-Total
Plant Protection
a) Cost of bio-agents
b) Cost of pesticides (Thiamethoxam/pro- Litres
fenophos)
103
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Furadon-3G Kg
c) Cost of Application Labour
Sub-Total
Irrigation cost if any Power month
Sub-Total
Cost of harvest
a) Combined harvester Hours
Post harvest charges
b) Cleaning and bagging (Human Labor) days
Sub total
Total cost of cultivation
Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns
a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.)
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.)
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)
e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)
Solution to exercise 2 – Paddy
Cost of Cultivation of Paddy (per hectare)
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Preparatory cultivation
a) Machine / labour No of hours 8 800 6400
b) Animal / labour Days 6 600 3600
Sub Total 10000
Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed Kgs 50 kgs 20 1000
b) Cost of seed treatment 50
c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour) Days 25 200 5000
d) Cost of thinning/gap filling Days 5 200 1000
Sub-Total 7050
Manures and Fertilizers
a) Cost of organic & Green Manuring (In- 350
situ plouging)
b) Application cost 100
104
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
c) Cost of fertilizer Kgs 120 N 12 1440
60 P 50 3000
40 K 28 1120
d) Application cost (Human Labour Male) Days 3 200 600
Sub-Total 6610
Weed control
a) Cost of Manual weeding Labour 30 200 6000
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Litre 2.5 200 500
Sub-Total 6500
Plant Protection
a) Cost of bio-agents
b) Cost of pesticides (Thiamethoxam/pro- Litres 5 350 1750
fenophos)
Furadon-3G Kg 15 60 900
c) Cost of Application Labour 6 200 1200
Sub-Total 3850
Irrigation cost if any Power 5 months 500 2500
Sub-Total 2500
Cost of harvest
a) Combined harvester Hours 4.5 1700 7650
Post harvest charges
b) Cleaning and bagging (Human Labor) days 10 200 2000
Sub total 9650
Total cost of cultivation 46160
Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns
a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls 50 1500 75000
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.) Cart load 8 800 6400
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.) 81400
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.) 46160
e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided 35240
by Total Cost)
e) Cost benefit ratio 1:1.76
105
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Exercise 1: Agricultural Calendar of Operations to Plan the Production of Maize
The times of work…
Of the main season are shown by a square
Of the off-season are shown by a circle
The tasks of the farmer
Prepare the field
Plough the field
Purchase seeds
Sow
Fertilizer application
Weeding
Apply insecticide
Harvest and store
Important Lesson:
For a good yield, the farmer plans to do the necessary work in the field and apply the inputs at the right
time based on the calender of operations throughout the year.
Here we will see how to determine if farm business was good or bad. We will calculate the “Income” and
“Expenditure” from different produce. Master Trainer may give the following exercise sheet to the farmers
to work out the details for the respective crops by changing the relevant package of practices as applicable
to local situations.
106
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
January Feb. March April May June July August Sept. October Nov. Dec.
Farm Management
Exercise Sheet - 2 (Maize – Blank sheet to be filled by Farmer based on worked
solution given below.
Steps:
• Multiply the quantity with the price in each line
• Add the money spent (“Expenditure”) on inputs and labour
• Multiply the yield by the price of sale (“Income”)
• Subtract the sum of “money-out” from the “Income”
• Determine if there was a gain or a loss
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Preparatory cultivation
a) Machine / labour No of hours
b) Animal / labour Days
Sub Total
Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed Kgs
b) Cost of seed treatment
c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour) Days
d) Cost of thinning/gap filling Days
Sub-Total
Manures and Fertilizers
c) Cost of fertilizer Kgs N
P
K
d) Application cost (Human Labour Male) Days
Sub-Total
Weed control
a) Cost of Manual weeding Labour
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Days
Sub-Total
Plant Protection
a) Cost of bio-agents
b) Cost of pesticides (Thiamethoxam/pro- Litres
fenophos)
Furadon-3G Kg
c) Cost of Application Labour
Sub-Total
107
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Irrigation cost if any Power month
Sub-Total
Cost of harvest
a) Combined harvester Hours
Post harvest charges
b) Cleaning and bagging (Human Labor) days
Sub total
Total cost of cultivation
Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns
a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.)
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.)
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)
e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)
Solution to exercise 2 - Maize
Cost of Cultivation of Maize (per hectare)
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Preparatory cultivation
a) Machine / labour No of hours 5 650 3250
b) Animal / labour Days 5 500 2500
Sub Total 3750
Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed Kgs 20 81.25 1625
b) Cost of seed treatment
c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour) Days 5 200 1000
d) Cost of thinning/gap filling Days 5 200 1000
Sub-Total 2625
Manures and Fertilizers
c) Cost of fertilizer Kgs 150 N 12 1800
60 P 50 3000
50 K 28 1400
d) Application cost (Human Labour Male) Days 10 150 1500
Sub-Total 7700
Weed control
108
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
a) Cost of Manual weeding Labour 20 150 3000
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Days 4 500 2000
Sub-Total 5000
Plant Protection
a) Cost of bio-agents
b) Cost of pesticides Litres 5 300 1500
Furadon-3G Kg 10 60 600
c) Cost of Application Labour 4 200 8
Sub-Total 2900
Irrigation cost if any Power 4 500 2000
Sub-Total 2000
Cost of harvest
a) human labour days 20 200 4000
b) Threshing (machine) quintals 40 60 2400
Post harvest charges
b) Cleaning and bagging (Human Labor) days 15 200 3000
Sub total 7400
Total cost of cultivation 31375
Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns
a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls 40 1000 40000
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.) Cart load 4 500 2000
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.) 42000
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.) 31375
e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided 10625
by Total Cost)
e) Cost benefit ratio 1:1.34
109
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Exercise 1: Agricultural Calendar - Operations to Plan the Production of Cotton
The times of work…
Of the main season are shown by a square
Of the off-season are shown by a circle
The tasks of the farmer
Prepare the field
Plough the field
Purchase seeds
Sow
Fertilizer
application
Weeding
Apply insecticide
Harvest and store
Important Lesson:
For a good yield, the farmer plans to do the necessary work in the field and apply the inputs at the right
time based on the calender of operations through out the year.
Here we will see how to determine if firm business was good or bad. We will calculate the “Income” and
“Expenditure” from different produce. Master Trainer may give the following exercise sheet to the farmers
to work out the details for the respective crops by changing the relevant package of practices as applicable
to local situations.
110
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
January Feb. March April May June July August Sept. October Nov. Dec.
Farm Management
Exercise Sheet - 2 (Cotton - Bt Cotton) – Blank sheet to be filled by Farmer based
on worked solution given below.
Steps:
• Multiply the quantity with the price in each line.
• Add the money spent (“Expenditure”) on inputs and labour
• Multiply the yield by the price of sale (“Income”)
• Subtract the sum of “money-out” from the “Income”
• Determine if there was a gain or a loss
Cost of Cultivation Cotton (per hectare)
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Preparatory cultivation
a) Machine / labour No of hours
b) Animal / labour Days
Sub Total
Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed Kgs
b) Cost of seed treatment
c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour) Days
d) Cost of thinning/gap filling Days
Sub-Total
Manures and Fertilizers
c) Cost of fertilizer Kgs N
P
K
d) Application cost (Human Labour Male) Days
Sub-Total
Weed control
a) Cost of Manual weeding Labour
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Days
Sub-Total
Plant Protection
a) Cost of bio-agents
b) Cost of pesticides (Imidacloprid/Thia- Litres
methoxam/profenophos)
Furadon-3G Kg
c) Cost of Application Labour
Sub-Total
111
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Irrigation cost if any Power
Sub-Total
Cost of harvest
a) Picking Kgs
Sub total
Total cost of cultivation
Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns
a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.)
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.)
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)
e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)
Solution to exercise 3 – Cotton
Cost of Cultivation of Cotton (per hectare)
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
Preparatory cultivation
a) Machine / labour No of hours 5 650 3250
b) Animal / labour Days 5 500 2500
Sub Total 5750
Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed Kgs 0.9 1860 1674
b) Cost of seed treatment
c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour) Days 8 200 1600
d) Cost of thinning/gap filling Days 2 200 400
Sub-Total 3674
Manures and Fertilizers
c) Cost of fertilizer Kgs 150 N 12 1800
60 P 50 3000
60 K 28 1680
d) Application cost (Human Labour Male) Days 30 150 4500
Sub-Total 10,980
Weed control
a) Cost of Manual weeding Labour 75 150 11250
112
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Activity Unit Quantity Price Total (Rs.)
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Days
Sub-Total 11250
Plant Protection
a) Cost of bio-agents
b) Cost of pesticides (Imidacloprid/ Thia- Litres 10 350 3500
methoxam/profenophos)
Furadon-3G Kg
c) Cost of Application Labour 20 200 4000
Sub-Total 7500
Irrigation cost if any Power 6 500 3000
Sub-Total 3000
Cost of harvest
a) Picking Kgs 2500 6 15000
Sub total 15000
Total cost of cultivation 57154
Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns
a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls 25
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.) 3600 90000
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.) 57154
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.) 32846
e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided 1:1.57
by Total Cost)
Note: The fixed cost and recurring cost like the interest, depreciation, opportunity cost, etc have not been
taken into calculation in the three crops above. Therefore, other things remaining constant, Only the vari-
able cost and returns have been used for the exercise.
113
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Module 4: Income and expenditure statement
Comparing results to know whether you are doing successful farm business
Please tell what is good and what is bad business and indicate the reasons.
Crop Unit 1 ha of Paddy 1 ha maize 1 ha Cotton
Production Quintal 50 q Main product = 40 q 25 q
By Product (stover/
Straw) = 4 cart load
Income Rs/ha 81400 42000 90000
Expenditure Rs/ha 46160 31375 57154
Profit or Rs/ha + 35240 + 10625 + 32846
Loss?
Profit Profit Profit
Rank I III II
* It proves that Paddy after Paddy realises the highest profit throughout the year followed by Cotton –
Maize. Paddy – Cotton is not feasible.
Remember: Even if Paddy after Paddy promises the highest profit throughout the year, farmer should
avoid continuous monocropping to ensure soil fertility through crop diversification and rotation to
realize sustained profitability of their farm.
Main Lessons
• To know if you are doing successful business with a crop, you need to know the “Income” and
“Expenditure” accurately.
• The farmer records the inputs & labour used in a field, and calculates the “Income” and “Ex-
penditure”
• From the “Income” the farmer subtracts the Expenditure. The result indicates whether farm is
making profit or loss.
• The farmer makes a PROFIT or GOOD BUSINESS if the “Income” is greater than the “Ex-
penditure.”
• It is a LOSS, if the “Expenditure” is greater than the “Income.” In that case it is BAD BUSINESS.
• A loss is illustrated by the the minus (dash) and a profit by the plus in front of the number.
• A good farmer will abandon loss making crop or use a better technique to make a profit.
• To ensure a profit, the farmer needs to visualise Income and Expenditure before production.
• The Difference between Income and Expenditure indicates whether we are making a loss or
profit from the use of the land.
• The Unit Cost of a crop indicates if it can compete with the same crop produced elsewhere.
In the case of food crops, the Unit Cost indicates if it is preferable to buy the produce in the
market.
• The good farmer calculates well ahead of the season to decide what to produce and which
techniques to use.
• During the production season the good farmer keeps records on money spent for farm opera-
tions and inputs.
• After the harvest, the good farmer evaluates the profit and identifies what changes are needed
to improve the planning and profit for the next production season
114
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
What are Fixed Costs?
Certain costs are called fixed costs. These are costs for equipment and tools that the farmer owns and
are used for various crops over several years, such as sprayers, irrigation pumps, buildings etc. The
Fixed Costs do not vary with the size of the field.
Blank Exercise sheet of Income and Expenditure Statement: Comparing Results to know whether you are
doing successful Farm Business
After, all the calculations farmers will determine the opportunities to increase revenues. By looking at the
money on this page farmers will learn
• How to make investment decisions and determine the best opportunities by using Gross Margin, La-
bour Productivity and Capital Productivity.
• Rank crops based on Profit or Loss
• What crops and techniques to choose?
• Make a choice based on this ranking
Unit Paddy 1 ha maize 1 ha Cotton
Surface Area Ha 1 1 1
1. Money-Out Rs/ha
(Variable Costs) Rs/
ha
Cost of Inputs Rs/ha
Labour Costs Rs/ha
2. Income Rs/ha
(Gross revenue)
Production Kg
Price Rs/kg
Yield x Price of Sale Rs/ha
Value of Produce (Gross Rs/ha
Income)
Expenditure Rs/ha
Profit or Loss?
Rank
115
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Module 5: Manage your Money throughout the Year
Bad management of money
• How does one know if the money is managed badly?
• What are the causes?
• What must one do to manage money well during the year?
One must plan! The person, who fails to plan, plans to fail!
First Step: Please look at Income and Expenditure for different crops on the farm and also look at
household expenditures. Below are the expenditures of a Household of 5 persons (1 child not yet in
school, 1 child in primary school, 1 old parent along with husband and wife). We discuss if we can pre-
dict all these expenditures.
Money Needs Expenditures (Rs) Period Can be foreseen
Provisions (food, fuel and household 36,000 Each month Yes
items for an average family size of 5
(3000 X12)
members)
School fees
Free education for primary school
children
Clothing
School uniforms for 1 child 1,000 June Yes
Clothing /year 5,000 April Yes
Happy events
Diwali /dussehra 1000 November Yes
Baisakhi/Ugadi 1000 January Yes
Unexpected events 3600 Each month @ Rs No
300
Health expenditure 2400 Per year No
Total expenditure 50000
Second Step:
• Let us put these numbers into a financial calendar. On the next page you will see the numbers calcu-
lated in Module 5.
• How much money is left at the end of each month?
• How much money is left at the end of the year?
The trainer explains how to do it.
116
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
117
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
esicrexE
–
)sR(
secitcarp
tnerruc
gnisu
mraf
a
no
desab
radnelac
laicnanfi
yddaP
–
yddaP
:1
esaC
ceD
voN
tcO
tpeS
guA
luJ
nuJ
yaM
rpA
raM
beF
naJ
erutidnepxE
yddaP
firahK
-
)ah
1(
0002
0518
0543
0047
01681
0556
ruobal
gnidulcni
stupnI
fo
tsoC
remmuS
-
)ah
1(yddaP
0556
0002
0518
0543
0047
01681
ruobal
gnidulcni
stupnI
fo
tsoC
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
0003
dlohesuoH
lairetam
dna
seef
loohcS
0001
0001
stneve
yppaH
0001
0005
gnihtolC
003
003
003
003
003
003
003
003
003
003
003
003
stneve
detcepxenU
0589
0036
05411
0576
00701
01912
05841
0035
05471
0576
00701
01912
htnom
rep
latoT
ceD
voN
tcO
tpeS
guA
luJ
nuJ
yaM
rpA
raM
beF
naJ
erutidnepxE
00418
-muS
)
00418(
yddaP
18(
yddaP
rem
rem
00418
firahK
-
)
00418(
yddaP
00418
00418
htnom
rep
latoT
ceD
voN
tcO
tpeS
guA
luJ
nuJ
yaM
rpA
raM
beF
naJ
erutidnepxE
0589
0036
05411
0576
00701
01912
05841
0035
05471
0576
00701
01912
htnoM
rep
erutidnepxE
-xE
ylimaF(
00005
+
snosaes
2X
)nosaes
rep
yddaP
rof
noitavitluC
fo
tsoC(
06164
=
raey
rep
erutidnepxe
latoT(
023241
raeY
eht
rof
erutidnepxE
latoT
raey
rep
erutidnep
)ecnalab
teN(
08402
=
023241-
008261
=
2
X
00418(
=
emocnI
raey
rep
ecnalab
latoT
Farm Management
* As the income is realised only during May and November, the monthly balance is shown as negative
which indicates that the farmers raises a hand loan/personal loan or shall keep the gross income (Rs 81,400
X 2 = 162,800) and spend through out the year based on the need.
Note: In this example all produce from the farm is sold as per the prevailing market rates. The profit of the
farmer depends on the price for the produce i.e., whether the Minimum Support Price (MSP) or market
rates are prevailing - which are both fluctuating.
Third Step:
Fill the second financial calendar. The expenditures for inputs and labour are those from the exercise
Sheets in Module 5 – using improved practices.
Fourth Step:
Discuss the differences and which situation is preferable. What changes are necessary?
Main Lessons
• In the agricultural enterprise, expenditure for the farm and the household are incurred every
month. But the revenue comes only after sale of produce. Therefore there are months of the
year where the expenditures are greater than the revenues. These months are called “deficit
months.”
• For this reason, the good farmer makes a financial calendar. The farmer plans expenditures for
production and household needs in consultation with his spouse.
• To be able to cover the expenditures in deficit months, the good farmer saves money from the
sales of produce (“surplus months”).
• Improved techniques may contribute to improve the revenues of the farmer.
• The needs for inputs can be identified with calculations of gross margin and the financial cal-
endar. This information can be used to make savings in a targeted way or to solicit credit for
production.
• The above calculations are done for a farmer with one hectare for Paddy – Paddy combination
in Kharif and Rabi for one year. The same exercise should be repeated for taking farm manage-
ment decisions for the combinations such as
• Cotton – Maize (Kharif – Rabi)
• Paddy – Maize (Kharif – Rabi)
• Maize – Maize (Kharif – Rabi)
Risk in Agriculture
The farmer does not like risks because they are difficult to predict. However, he/she can determine the
risk during the planning so that the impact on revenues could be minimised. For example, Module 4
indicates income and expenditure of paddy, maize and cotton. With available data, Paddy - Paddy is the
best preferred cropping pattern. However, the farmer can make a judicious decision taking prevailing and
anticipated risks into considerations. The anticipated risks and possible decisions are as follows:
Anticipated Risks Remarks
Reduction in Paddy Market price by 10% Cotton – Maize is preferred
Inadequate water due to drought for Paddy - Paddy Cotton – Maize is preferred followed by Maize
- Maize. Quantity of water available decides the
cropping pattern.
118
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farm Management
Anticipated Risks Remarks
Lack of capital for investment for Paddy – Paddy or Paddy and Maize is preferred followed by Maize -
Cotton - Maize Maize
Serious pest problems in Cotton Paddy – Paddy is preferred
Main Lessons
• Comparing the gross margins of different crops and the production techniques, helps to make
decisions on using the land to maximise revenue. This comparison is important to all agricul-
tural entrepreneurs.
• Comparing the labour productivity helps to identify the crops and techniques that make best
use of labour (family or wage labour). It also indicates if it is profitable to work on your own
farm.
• Comparing the capital productivity indicates which crops or production techniques make
best use of money invested.
• Production decisions are based on these comparisons.
• The good agricultural entrepreneur knows that a fluctuation in prices constitutes a risk and
revenues. Risks are concern for traditional as well as improved varieties and techniques.
• To evaluate the impact of this market risk, the entrepreneur calculates estimated the gross
margin with a much lower price (pessimistic) than the current price (or last season’s price). If
the pessimistic gross margin estimate can still satisfy the revenue objectives, then the risk is
acceptable.
• To evaluate the impact of production risks, the agricultural entrepreneurs calculates a gross
margin using a yield lower (pessimistic) than expected. If the pessimistic gross margin esti-
mate can still satisfy the revenue objectives, then the risk is acceptable.
119
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
5. Occupational Health and Safety of Farmers
5.1. Objectives of the session
• To create an awareness about causes of health hazards, risks and fatalities in agriculture.
• To impart the knowledge on preventive measures of health hazards in agriculture.
• To enlighten the farmers on use of first aid in emergencies.
5.2. What we know at the end of the session
• Important occupational health hazards in agriculture
• Factors responsible for increasing risk of injury or illness for farmers
• Safe handling of agro chemicals
• Colour coding of pesticides
• First aid measures for pesticide poisoning
• Care in use of pesticides by farmers
• Safety tips to reduce the risk of injuries and fatalities while handling machineries
• First aid for accidents
In agriculture, farmers work under open condition in natural environment, which expose them to vari-
ous occupational hazards, especially more caused due to handling of chemicals and machineries. Be-
sides, natural hazards are caused due to snakebite, wild animal attack, etc. Knowledge on preventive and
curative aspects of these occupational hazards would reduce risks and ensure the safety to the farmers.
5.3. Important occupational health hazards in agriculture
Exposure Health Effect Specificity to Agriculture
Hot Weather Dehydration, heat cramps, heat exhaus- Most agricultural operations are per-
tion, heat stroke, skin cancer formed outdoors
Snakes, insects Fatal or injurious bites and stings Close proximity results in high incidence
Sharp tools Injuries ranging from cuts to fatalities Most farm situations require a wide vari-
ety of skill levels for which workers have
little knowledge
Physical labour, Back pain and body pain Agricultural work involves uncomfort-
carrying loads able conditions and sustained carrying of
excessive loads
Pesticides Acute poisoning or chronic poisoning Pesticides can be hazardous and must be
used with Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE)
Dusts, fumes Irritation of the eyes and respiratory tract Agricultural workers are exposed to a
wide range of dusts and gases during
plant protection with few exposure con-
trols and limited use of PPE
121
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
Gases, pathogen • Skin diseases such as fungal infections • Workers are in direct contact with en-
and allergic reactions vironmental pathogens, fungi, infect-
• Parasitic diseases such as malaria, ed animals, and allergenic plants
sleeping sickness and hookworm • Workers have intimate contact with
• Animal related diseases such as an- parasites in soil, waste water/sewage,
thrax, bovine tuberculosis and rabies dirty tools and unhygienic housing
(at least 40 of the 250 animal related • Workers have ongoing, close contact
diseases are occupational diseases in with animals through raising and
agriculture) sheltering
• Cancers • Agricultural workers are exposed to
a mix of biological agents, pesticides,
and diesel fumes, all linked with can-
cer
Others • Electricity shocks, fire, road accidents, • Loss of life and injuries and suffering
livestock and wild animal attacks, fall- to the dependents
ing into wells, lightening, psychologi-
cal depression, suicides, etc.
Adapted from IFPRI, 2006
5.5. Factors that may increase risk of including economic damage. So there should
be a proper understanding on hazards of pes-
injury or illness for farm workers
ticides.
Age: Injury rates are highest under 15 and over 65 Effects on human beings
years of age.
• Pesticides accumulate in fatty tissues and re-
Equipment and machinery: Most farm acci- productive cells lead to birth defects, abnor-
dents and fatalities involve machinery. Proper ma- malities, abortions, premature deliveries, etc.
chine guarding and regular equipment maintenance • Farm workers who regularly spray pesticides
according to manufacturers’ recommendations can are susceptible to impaired eyesight.
help prevent accidents. • The liver is particularly susceptible to damage
by chlorinated hydrocarbons, which can lead to
Non-availability of protective equipments:
higher risk of serious infection.
Using protective equipment, such as seat belts on
tractors and personal protective equipment (such as Environmental exposures lead to
safety gloves, cover alls, boots, hats, aprons, goggles
and face shields) could significantly reduce farming • Air pollution
injuries. • Soil and water pollution
• Food contamination
Lack of medical care: Hospitals and emergency
medical care are typically not readily accessible in Looking into the implications of pesticides on so-
rural areas near farms. However, the farmers may cio-economic dimensions, use of pesticides should
utilize for example 108 mobile medical emergency be judiciously planned only in critical situations
services during emergencies. with utmost care. Management of pest below Eco-
nomic Threshold Level (ETL) is most desirable.
Socio - economic risks
• There are dangers due to indiscriminate pes-
5.6. Safe handling of agro chemicals
ticide/weedicide application to soil, water, air,
food chain, natural enemies of pest, resistance Agro chemicals are widely used in agriculture,
of pest, etc. which are major source of health hazards to
• Pesticides are hazardous, so there will be asso- farmers. Important tips to farmers for safe use of
ciated risk and impact of risk on social system agro chemicals are as follows:
122
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
Buying pesticides • Never eat and drink while applying.
• Use Personal Protective Equipment (PPE),
Before buying think over this
particularly long shirt and pants, closed
• Which pest is to be controlled?
shoes as well as protection mask and gloves.
• Is damage crossing threshold level requiring
• Avoid application during rainy period.
pesticide use?
• Never blow out clogged nozzles or hoses
• Have you observed any predators that check
with your mouth, use pin or fine wire for
pest attack?
cleaning.
• What is the recommendation for the ob-
• Avoid windy conditions and do not spray
served problem?
against wind direction.
• Which is the least toxic and low persistent
After application
chemical among recommendations?
• Immediately after application take bath and
While buying
change cloths.
• Buy from a reputed and licensed store.
• All clothes must be washed after spraying/
• Buy only required quantity and not to go for
dusting and wash them separately.
bulk purchase.
• Never leave residues of pesticide in sprayers
• Do not buy leaky containers.
and dusters.
• See the expiry date.
• While cleaning see that water used for
• Buy only ISI / BIS marked products.
cleaning should not enter the drinking wa-
• Don’t buy banned and restricted chemicals.
ter stream/wells.
Transportation • Do not go into the treated field until the
• Do not transport/carry pesticides along recommended safety period has passed.
with food products. • Do not harvest produce before safe period.
• Do not spill or allow leakage while trans-
Safe container disposal
porting.
• Burry the containers in the field after use.
• If leakage is observed clean the vehicle.
• Don’t use for food and feed storage.
Storage • Do not sell empty container.
• Don’t keep chemicals in kitchen or with • Do not wash the used containers in commu-
animal feed. nity water sources.
• Keep out of reach of children.
Colour Coding of pesticides:
• Keep under lock and key.
The colour band on the pesticide container indi-
• Keep in well ventilated separate room.
cates the hazard level of pesticides. While han-
• Avoid cross contamination of different
dling pesticides farmers should take colour band
chemicals.
into consideration.
• Do not keep with human or animal medi-
• Red – Very toxic to toxic
cine.
• Yellow – Harmful
• Properly reseal before storing again.
• Blue - Moderately hazardous
Application • Green - Acute hazard unlikely in normal use
• Read the label and follow the instructions.
5.7. First aid measures for pesticide
• Don’t work alone while handling and apply-
poisoning
ing.
• Don’t allow children and animals near mix- • In case of skin contact, remove contaminant
ing and application site. contacts and wash with clean water.
• Use long wooden stick for mixing. • In case of inhalation, remove from site and
• Mix only the quantity that you need for the provide good clean air site, keep the head and
next application. shoulder upright.
• Avoid excessive spraying and unintended • In case of unconscious and breathing stops,
site application. provide artificial respiration.
• Read the label and instructions carefully • If pesticide is swallowed, induce vomiting by
before opening the pack. giving 2-3 liters salt water. Give milk after that.
123
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
• Take the patient to doctor at the earliest. Physical and mental drudgery
• Take the container along with patient to consult
To reduce drudgery related to hard work in differ-
doctor.
ent agricultural operations, several technologies for
Snake and other animal bites or attacks land preparation, weeding, pesticide application
and precautions and various other farm works have been developed
including farm machinery which need to be used
Snakebite is a routinely occurring life threatening by the farmers to keep themselves fit and healthy.
emergency in India. The mortality and morbidity Farmers are advised to contact local extension
associated with the diverse presentation of snake- functionaries and scientists to obtain information
bites can be decreased if a proper history of the on such drudgery reducing farm machineries.
patient’s background and habits combined with a
thorough knowledge of the specific features of the 5.8. Care in use of pesticides by
regional snakes are kept in mind.
farmers
Useful tips for safe use of pesticides by farm-
ers are:
• Identify the pest and ascertain the damage done.
• Use pesticide only if it has exceeded the economical injury level.
• Use only the recommended pesticide, which is the least toxic.
• Read instructions manual of the pesticide and equipment.
• Check the spraying equipment and accessories, which are to be used.
• Ascertain that all components are clean, especially filling and suction,
strainer, sprayer tank, cut off device and nozzle
• Replace worn out parts such as ‘O’ ring, seal, gasket, worn out nozzle tip,
hose clamps and valves.
• Test the sprayer and ascertain whether it pumps the required output at
rated pressure. Check the nozzle spray pattern and discharge rate.
• Calibrate the sprayer. Set sprayer speed and nozzle swath by adjusting
spray height and nozzle spacing.
124
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
• Make sure that appropriate protective clothing is available and is used
• Train all concerned with the application and also understand the recom-
mendations. Ensure that soap, towel and plenty of water is available.
• Pesticide should be kept in dry and locked store.
During spraying
• Take only sufficient pesticide for the day’s application from the store to the
site.
• DO NOT transfer pesticides from original container and packing into the
containers.
• Recheck the use instructions of pesticide and equipment.
• Make sure pesticides are mixed in the correct quantities.
• Wear appropriate clothing.
• Avoid contamination of the skin especially eyes and mouth.
• Liquid formulation should be poured carefully to avoid splashing.
• Never eat, drink or smoke when mixing or applying pesticides. NEVER
blow out clogged nozzles or hoses with your mouth.
• Follow correct spray technique. Spray plant crop thoroughly by operating
sprayer at correct speed and correct pressure.
125
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
• Follow correct spray technique. Spray plant crop thoroughly by operating
sprayer at correct speed and correct pressure.
• Never allow children or their unauthorized persons to be nearby during
mixing. Never leave pesticides unattended in the field.
• Never spray if the wind is blowing towards grazing livestock or pastures
regularly used.
• Spraying should be done in the direction of Wind.
After spraying
• Remaining pesticides left in the tank after spraying should be emptied and
disposed off in pits dug on wasteland.
• Never empty the tank into irrigation canals or ponds.
• Never leave unused pesticides in sprayers. Always clean equipment prop-
erly. After use, oil it and then keep away in storeroom.
• Do not use empty pesticide containers for any purpose.
• Crush and bury the containers preferably in a land filled dump.
• Clean buckets, sticks, measuring jars etc used in preparing the spray solu-
tion.
126
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
• Remove and wash protective clothing and footwear.
• Wash yourself well and put on clean clothing.
• Keep an accurate record of pesticide usage.
• Prevent persons from entering treated areas until it is safe to do so.
• Mark the sprayed plots with a flag.
Source : tnauagriportal
5.9 Basic Measures to Manage unnoticed because they will not be reported. So
learning from mistakes will be less. Safety tips to
Weeds, Diseases and Pest Problems
reduce the risk of injuries and fatalities while han-
• Prevention is better than cure, hence follow the dling machineries are as follows:
preventive measures discussed above
• Safety can be improved on farm by increasing
• Keep pest below ETL using preventive tech-
awareness of farming hazards and making a
niques
conscious effort to prepare for emergency situ-
• Give more attention to pest warnings by Agri-
ations including fires, vehicle accidents, elec-
culture Department officials and experts
trical shocks from equipment and wires and
• Be watch full on weather forecast by ICAR and
chemical exposures.
IMD
• Be especially alert to hazards that may affect
• Consult KVK or Scientist in early stages
children and the elderly.
• Discuss the problems with fellow farmers, you
• Minimize hazards by carefully selecting the
may get many traditional tips
products to ensure safety.
• Understand the scientific rationale behind each
• Always use seat belts when operating tractors.
pest management ITKs
• Read and follow instructions in equipment op-
• Have regular contact with local Research and
erator’s manuals and on product labels.
Development wings of agriculture and allied
• Inspect equipment routinely for problems that
sectors to get a recent development.
may cause accidents.
• Discuss safety hazards and emergency proce-
5.10. Safety tips to reduce the risk of
dures with all concerned.
injuries and fatalities while handling
• Take precautions to prevent entrapment and
machineries suffocation caused by unstable surfaces of
grain storage bins and silos. Never “walk on the
Contrary to the popular image of fresh air and grain.”
peaceful surroundings, a farm is not a hazard • Be aware that methane gas, carbon dioxide,
free work setting. Every year, thousands of farm ammonia and hydrogen sulfide can form in un-
workers are injured and hundreds die in farming ventilated grain silos and manure pits and can
accidents. Safety in agriculture is one of the main suffocate or poison farmers or explode.
concern, especially when handling with farm tools • Wear clothing that fits well and is not loose fit-
and machinery. Many accidents in agriculture go ting to avoid being caught in pinch points.
127
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
• Never reach over or work near unguarded ro- • Do not allow riders or passengers in the back
tating parts. of pickup trucks.
• Turn off machinery to attend to repairs. • Before starting machinery, all operators should
• Always replace shields that were removed know where kids are located. You may be un-
for maintenance. able to hear or see children, especially behind
• Plug unused or failed borewell pits large wheels or in blind spots.
• Check all equipment for potential w.rap points • All equipment should be parked and locked
(e.g. where clothing or hair could be wrapped with the keys removed when not in use.
around a shaft) and if possible, shield those • Keep hand tools out of reach of children, espe-
points. cially those with sharp or hot parts.
• Replace any damaged manufacturer installed
Better safety and health practices reduce farmer fa-
warning labels and place warnings on equip-
talities, injuries and illnesses as well as associated
ment parts not previously labeled (consider
costs such as workers’ compensation insurance
painting them with a bright color, perhaps with
premiums, lost production and medical expenses.
a wide stripe).
A safer and more healthy workplace improves mo-
• Stay alert and warn others when working with
rale and productivity.
shear and cutting points (e.g. objects with
blades or hard edges used to cut). Some shear
and cutting points cannot be guarded, which First aid for accidents: The farmers injured
can result in severe cuts, lost limbs or injuries should be given first aid at the earliest in order to
from objects thrown by the cutting type equip- reduce the damage caused by the injuries. Impor-
ment. tant tips are as follows:
• Wait until a tractor has stopped completely be-
• The treatment should be given from a person
fore stepping into the hitching position.
trained in basic first aid, using supplies from a
• Never touch free-wheeling parts (i.e. parts that
first-aid kit.
continue to spin after the power is shut off) un-
• Medical treatment and care given at the site of
til they have stopped moving. This could take
any medical emergency or while transporting
2-2½ minutes.
any victim to a medical facility.
• Be aware of burn points: mufflers, manifolds
• Make sure that first-aid trained personnel are
and even gear cases.
available to provide quick and effective first-
• Hydraulic systems contain fluid under extreme
aid. Alternatively, one of the family members
pressure. Before loosening, tightening, remov-
should be trained.
ing or otherwise working with any fittings or
• Make sure first-aid supplies at your workplace
parts, relieve this pressure (shut off the hy-
are appropriate to your occupational setting.
draulic pump, lower implements and follow
The response time of your emergency medical
instructions in the operator’s manual).
services is very important.
• Keep equipment in good repair and safety fea-
• Good knowledge about locally available anti-
tures up to date.
dotes or medicinal plants, which can be used.
• “Proper machine inspection and maintenance
• Keep the first aid kit(s) in the work place.
can help prevent accidents”.
• Keep clean water in the work place.
• When it comes to machinery maintenance,
• Keep mobile numbers of trained person on
a shield and guard to cover spinning parts or
first aid, ambulances, local hospital, local doc-
blades should be kept in place.
tors and vehicle owners in the near by vicinity.
• Follow the one seat, one rider rule. If there is
only one seat on the equipment, there should
5.11. Suggested items for your first-
only be one rider – an adult.
aid kit
• Don’t allow children to play or ride on equip-
ment or in areas where machinery is used or
• Sterile adhesive bandages
stored.
• Small roll of absorbent cotton pads of different
• Under aged children should not operate 2, 3,
sizes
and 4 wheeled vehicles.
• Adhesive tape
128
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Occupational Health and Safety
• Triangular and roller bandages
• Cotton (1 roll) 5.12. Lessons Learnt
• Band-aids (Plasters)
1. Awareness on occupational health and
• Scissors
safety issues is must for every farmer.
• Pen torch
2. Majority of the health hazards in Agri-
• Latex gloves (2 pair)
culture are preventive in nature provided
• Tweezers
farmers are aware about.
• Needle
3. Farmers should handle the agro chemicals
• Moistened towels and clean dry cloth pieces.
safely. Little negligence may cost the life of
• Antiseptic (Savlon or dettol)
human beings and livestock.
4. Dispose the pesticide containers safely.
5. First aid knowledge and skills saves the
lives.
6. Keep away children from farm machiner-
ies.
First Aid Kit
• Thermometer
• Tube of petroleum jelly or other lubricant
• Assorted sizes of safety pins
• Cleansing agent/soap
Non-prescription drugs
• Aspirin or paracetamol pain relievers
• Antidiarrhea medication
• Antihistamine cream for Bee Stings.
• Antacid (for stomach upset)
• Laxative
Kits should be checked at least weekly to ensure
adequate number of needed items is available. Kits
may be kept in the work place.
Make sure that first-aid supplies are:
• Easily accessible to all farmers.
• Stored in containers that protect them from
damage, deterioration or contamination.
• Containers must be clearly marked, not locked,
and may be sealed.
• Able to be moved to the location of an injured
or acutely ill worker.
• Make sure emergency washing facilities are
functional and readily accessible.
129
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
6. Farmers’ Access to Services
6.1. Objectives of the session
• To enhance awareness about source of extension, information and services among farmers.
• To expose farmers to public and private extension services.
• To encourage farmers to avail extension services through ICT means.
• To enhance farmers knowledge on agricultural credit, insurance and legal aspects.
6.2. What we know at the end of the session
Sources of extension and nature of services provided by following extension service providers:
• Public extension services
• Private extension services
• Institutional sources
• ICT sources
• Agricultural credit
• Agricultural insurance
• Legal aspects
Farmers’ Access to Services
6.3. Important services required for life who are socially, economically and technologi-
cally advanced compared to other farmers. They
farmers
go in search of advanced technologies proactively,
• Information adopt and harvest the benefit of technologies. They
• Inputs (seed, fertilizer, pesticide, machinery, are the nearest and easiest source of agricultural in-
etc.) formation to other farmers. For example, contact
• Infrastructure (cold storage, godown, feed mix- farmers, award winning farmers, Block Farmers
ing unit, etc.) Advisory Committee (BFAC) members, District
• Market (market yard, market intelligence, Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC) members,
transport, etc.) State Farmers Advisory Committee (SFAC) mem-
• Developmental schemes/programmes bers, farmers running farm school, etc.
• Credit and insurance, etc.
Input Dealers: are mostly village level businessmen
The above services are needed with dimensions of who sell seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and machiner-
accessibility, quality, cost effectiveness and timeli- ies to the farmers. Also provides extension adviso-
ness. ries by their strength of proximity to the farmers.
However maximum precautions has to be exercised
Information is the critical input required for for accessing the advisory services as they are not
the farmers to bring about changes starting professionally qualified extension functionaries.
from selection of crops till the marketing. However, some input dealers are trained through
various programme like Diploma in Agricultural
Past experience: The most important source of in- Extension Service for Input Dealers (DAESI) who
formation to the farmers is his/her past experience can provide quality agricultural information. In
itself. However before acting upon information other cases, advisory from local public extension
based on past experience, he/she needs to cross functionaries and inputs based on the advisory
check the relevance to the present context. from input dealers can be accessed.
Progressive farmers: are the small segment of rural Cooperative Societies: District Central Cooperative
131
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
banks and Primary Societies reach the farmers. The focus is on transfer of tech-
nology and undertaking agricultural development
• Extend agriculture credits under priority sector
programmes of state and central Governments.
• Implement NABARD schemes
• Implement Government schemes Agricultural Technology Management
• Implement social security schemes
Agency (ATMA): An agency undertaking ag-
• Extends crop loans
ricultural development programmes at district level
Land (Agriculture & Rural) Development Banks in which agriculture and allied departments along
• Extend medium and long term credit to agri- with private sectors work together. At village level
culture farmer friend, at block level Block Technology
• Implement government schemes Manager and Subject Matter Specialists provide
agricultural information and benefits of schemes/
Public sector extension: Represented mainly
programmes to the farmers. ATMA organize vari-
by the State Agriculture and allied departments
ous extension activities like field visits, trainings,
continues to be the most important source of in-
demonstrations, field days, farmers – Scientists in-
formation for the majority of farmers. Each depart-
teractions, exhibitions, exposure visits, campaign,
ment such as Agriculture, Horticulture, Sericulture,
etc. Publish extension information through print
Animal Husbandry, Marketing, etc. have their own
and electronic media, Provide alerts to farmers on
extension manpower and delivery mechanism to
agriculture operations and precautions.
DAC, MoA, GoI
MANAGE/EEIs
State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC)
Inter Departmental Working Group (IDWG)
State
SAMETI & SAU/ICAR State Farmers
F W
Nodal cell
Institutes Advisory Committee
U O
N R
D District Training Centre, ATMA District Farmers Advisory K
KVK & ZRS (GB & MC) Committee
F P
L L
Block
O Block Farmers Advisory A
Block Technology Team
ATMA cell
W Committee N
Farmer
Agri-Enterpreneurs Farm Schools
Friend
CIGs, FIGs, FARMERS/FARM WOMEN
Commodity Interest Groups of Farmers extension, credit and marketing purpose. E.g. Amul
for dairy farmers, Maha Grapes for Grape farmers.
(CIGs): A group of farmers growing same crop/
enterprise, share common problems and benefits.
Kisan Call Center (KCC): An online agricul-
Matured CIGs can collectively access information,
tural advisory service provided by Government to
inputs, infrastructure, credit and market linkages.
farmers. Farmers can access information on crops,
Some CIGs have independent setup for research,
132
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
livestock, fisheries, inputs, credit, government Commodity Boards and National Insti-
scheme benefits, through toll free number 1800 180
tutes: Commodity Boards like Coffee Board, Rub-
1551 OR 1551 from 6 A.M. to 10 P.M. except on
ber Board, Spice Board, Tea Board, Coconut Devel-
Sundays and Gazetted holidays. Beyond these hours
opment Board, Tobacco Board, Silk Board, Cotton
the calls are attended in the IVRS mode. Qualified
Corporation of India, National institutes like Na-
professional in local language provides the advisory.
tional Institute of Agricultural Extension Manage-
ment (MANAGE), Central Food and Technology
Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK): A district sci-
Research Institute (CFTRI), Defence Research and
entific organizations that works on technology gen-
Development Organisation (DRDO), National In-
eration, refinement and dissemination. KVK con-
stitute of Plant Health Management (NIPHM), Na-
sists of qualified multidisciplinary experts focusing
tional Institute of Agricultural Marketing (NIAM),
mainly on locally relevant agricultural issues. KVKs
National Horticulture Mission (NHM), National
organize front line demonstrations, exposure visits,
Horticulture Board (NHB). etc., provide extension
training programmes, exhibitions, field days and
advisory services to their respective clientele group.
provide agricultural literature to the farmers. Some
of the KVKs do provide input support for farmers.
International institution: International insti-
tution namely International Center for Research in
Agriculture university extension system
Semi Arid and Tropics (ICRISAT) in Hyderabad is
• Maintains supportive extension service to line
also serving farmers on crops in semiarid and trop-
departments.
ics.
• Supplements efforts of line departments for ser-
vice through their extension units, research sta-
Agriclinics and agribusiness centers
tions and through teaching campuses.
• Agriclinics and Agribusiness Centers are advi-
• Develop innovative extension strategies.
sory and business centers managed by agricul-
• Provide technical knowledge to line depart-
tural professionals in rural areas.
ments.
• They provide client specific advisory services
• Organize front line demonstration of their
free/payment basis.
technologies.
• Details on Agripreneurs are available at www.
• Disseminate technologies through public- pri-
agriclinics.net.
vate partnerships.
Agribusiness companies
Indian Council of Agriculture Research
• Almost all the Agribusiness Companies pro-
(ICAR)
vide extension advisory services to farmers in
• Generates agricultural technologies. their specialized crops/inputs.
• Provides extension support through its research • Contract farming assures extension, input,
institutes and KVKs. management and market access to farmers by
• Develops innovative extension strategies. agribusiness companies. Credit is also provided
• Provides technical knowledge to line depart- in few cases.
ments. • Few agribusiness companies are providing dif-
• Organizes front line demonstration of their ferent services to farmers through farmers one
technologies. stop shop concept.
• Disseminate technologies through public-pri-
Non-Governmental Organisation (NGOs)
vate partnerships.
Many NGOs are working in various aspects of ag-
ricultural development such as farm advisory, in-
put supply, infrastructures, processing, marketing,
community mobilization, micro finance, livelihood
development, etc. Farmers can take the advantages
of such NGOs wherever available.
133
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
Mass Media ing of agricultural produce
• Rapidly expanding mass media ensures easy • www.agritech.tnau.ac.in: Technologies, spe-
access to information to farmers on real time cial technologies, schemes and services
basis. • www.nhm.nic.in: Horticultural technologies
• Agricultural magazines, newspapers provide and schemes
updated information on agriculture to farmers
6.4. Accessing financial services –
regularly.
• Community radio, radio, and television pro- sources
vides updated information to the farmers.
• Self Help Groups (Micro Finance Institutions)
• Mobile is also widely used as channel for reach-
• Nationalized and other private banks
ing farmers by many organizations.
• Cooperative banks and societies
Internet opens worldwide information to the door- • Subsidy schemes of State/Central Governments
step of farmers. Some of the important agri portals
useful to the farmers along with key information Important types of credits and savings
available are as follows:
Kisan Credit Card Scheme (KCC) aims at providing
• www.icar.org: Research institutes and major
adequate and timely support from the banking sys-
technologies
tem to the farmers for their short-term credit needs
• www.indiaagristat.com: Agricultural related
for cultivation of crops. This mainly helps farmers
statistics
for purchase of inputs during the cropping season.
• www.isapindia.org: Query Redress Services
Credit card scheme proposed to introduce flexibil-
(QRS)
ity to the system and improve cost efficiency.
• www.indiaagronet.com: Agricultural jobs,
buy and sell and exhibitions Benefits of KCC
• www.agriwatch.com: Market prices of agri-
• Simplifies disbursement procedures.
cultural commodities
• Removes rigidity regarding cash and kind.
• www.indiancommodities.com: Forecasts
• No need to apply for a loan for every crop and
of prices of commodities, online trade and
every season.
warehousing
• Assured availability of credit at any time ena-
• \www.krishiworld.com: Multilingual portal,
bling reduced interest burden for the farmer.
organic farming, crop specific information,
• Helps to buy seeds, fertilizers at farmer’s con-
disease and pest, market watch and home
venience and choice.
gardening
• Helps to buy on cash-avail discount from deal-
• www.agriculture-industry-india.com: Ex-
ers.
port – import directory, agro trade leads,
• Credit facility for 3 years – no need for sea-
and agro Trade events
sonal appraisal.
• www.agricoop.nic.in: central sector schemes
• Maximum credit limit based on agriculture in-
and policies
come.
• www.apeda.com: Export and import proce-
• Any number of withdrawals permitted subject
dure and schemes
to credit limit.
• www.fert.nic.in: Fertiliser details
• Repayment only after harvest.
• www.mofpi.nic.in: Food processing tech-
• Rate of interest as applicable to agriculture ad-
nologies and schemes
vance.
• www.agmarknet.nic.in: Prices of commodi-
• Security, margin and documentation norms as
ties and trends
applicable to agricultural advance.
• www.icrisat.org: Technologies for semi arid
tropics How to get Kisan credit cards
• www.ikisan.com: Agro informatics, soft • Approach nearest public sector bank and get
ware services and education the details.
• www.uttamkrishi.com: Hindi website and • Eligible farmers will get a Kisan Credit Card
toll free help line and a passbook. It contains details like name,
• www.nafed-india.com: Cooperative market-
134
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
address, particulars of land holding, borrow- Rs.15/- per KCC holder, Bank has to pay
ing limit, validity period, a passport size pho- Rs.10/- and Rs.5/- has to be recovered from
tograph of holder which may serve both as an KCC holder.
identity card and facilitate recording of transac- • Claims Procedure - In case of death, disable-
tions on an ongoing basis. ment claims & death due to drowning: Claim
• Borrower is required to produce the card cum administration will be done by the designated
pass book whenever he/she operates the ac- office of the Insurance Companies. Separate
count. procedure is to be followed.
Banks implementing KCC Credit support from nationalized
• Allahabad Bank - Kisan Credit Card (KCC) banks
• Andhra Bank - AB Kisan Green Card
• Bank of Baroda – BKCC • Extend agriculture credits under priority sec-
• Bank of India - Kisan Samadhan Card tor, implement NABARD Schemes, Govern-
• Canara Bank – KCC ment schemes and social security schemes
• Corporation Bank – KCC • Extend crop and agriculture investment/term
• Dena Bank - Kisan Gold Credit Card loans
• Oriental Bank of Commerce -Oriental Green
Extension of Bank-SHG Linkage Pro-
Card (OGC)
gramme to Agricultural Purposes
• Punjab National bank - PNB Krishi Card
• State Bank of Hyderabad –KCC • The loans extended under both the SHG link-
• State Bank of India –KCC age programme and Primary Agriculture Co -
• Syndicate Bank –SKCC operative Societies (PACS) originate from joint
• Vijaya Bank -Vijaya Kisan Card efforts of people and financial institutions.
• Personal Accident Insurance Package” is pro- • The microfinance (through SHGs- Bank link-
vided to the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) holders. age) meets both consumption and production
needs of the people compared to the conven-
Salient features of the scheme
tional system that caters only to the produc-
• This scheme covers all the Kisan Credit Card tion needs.
Holders against death or permanent disability
within the country. Commodity Boards Finance
• All KCC holders up to the age of 70 years are
• Give crop loans and subsidies
eligible.
• Crop pledge loan
The benefits under the scheme are as un- • Market loan
der
6.5. Agricultural insurance
• Death due to accident caused by outward, vio-
lent and visible means: Rs.50,000/- Insurance coverage is given to farmers mainly by
• Permanent total disability: Rs.50,000/- Agricultural Insurance Corporation Ltd (AIC)
• Loss of two limbs or two eyes or one limb and and many other private agencies. All loanee farm-
one eye: Rs.50,000/- ers automatically eligible for agricultural insurance
• Loss of one limb or one eye: Rs.25,000/- coverage. Non loanee farmers can also avail this
• Period of Master Policy - Valid for a period of benefit by payment of nominal premium. Some of
3 years. the important agricultural insurance schemes avail-
• Period of Insurance - Insurance cover will be able at present are as follows.
in force for a period of one year from the date
• National Agricultural Insurance Scheme
of receipt of premium from the participating
• WBCIS - Weather Based Crop Insurance
Banks in cases where annual premium is paid.
Scheme
In case of three year cover, the period of insur-
• MNAIS - Modified National Agricultural In-
ance would be for three years from the date of
surance Scheme
receipt of premium.
• RISC - Rainfall Insurance Scheme for Coffee
• Premium - Out of the Annual premium of
135
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
(Coffee Insurance)
• Rubber Insurance 5.12. Lessons Learnt
• Coconut Insurance
1. Important extension sources to farmers are
• Varsha Bima/Rainfall Insurance
progressive farmers, input dealers, Coop-
• Rabi Weather Insurance
erative Society, ATMA, Kissan Call Center
• Wheat Insurance (Weather & Biomass)
(Toll Free No. 1800 180 1551), Krishi Vi-
• Potato Insurance
gyan Kendra, Agricultural Universities,
• Bio-Fuel Tree/Plant Insurance
ICAR Institutions, Commodity Boards,
• Pulpwood Tree Insurance
National Institutes, Interantional Insti-
• Cardamom Plant & Yield Insurance
tutes, Agriclinics and Agribusiness Cent-
6.6 . Legal aspects ers, NGOs, Radio, TV, Newspapers, Agri-
cultural Magazines and agricultural related
It is important for farmers to know the legal as- websites.
pects of important inputs namely seeds, fertiliz- 2. Important sources of finance to farmers
ers, pesticides, etc. are banks, cooperatives and SHGs.
3. Kissan Credit Cards provides adequate and
The Seeds Act 1966 deals with regulations re-
timely financial support from the banking
lated to production, certification, quality control,
system to the farmers.
sales, seed analysis, seed inspection, export and
4. Non loanee farmers are advised to take the
import, penalty, exemptions and amendment. The
benefits of agricultural insurance cover-
details are available under http://agricoop.nic.in/
age by paying nominal premium, maintain
seedsact.htm
close liaison with extension, credit and in-
surance providers regularly.
The Fertiliser (Control) order 1985 deals
with regulations related to fertilizer Price control,
control on distribution, registration of dealers,
manufacture of fertilizers, mixtures, restrictions on
manufacturing, import, sale, enforcement authori-
ties, analysis of samples, specifications and penalty.
The details are available under www.agricoop.nic.in/
sublegi/FertilizerControlOrder.htm
Insecticides Act, 1968: An act to regulate the
import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution
and use of insecticides with a view to prevent risk
to human beings or animals and for matters con-
nected. The details are available under http://cibrc.
nic.in/insecticides_act.htm
For more information, farmers may contact nearest
banks, agricultural department or Kisan Call Cent-
ers.
136
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
137
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
138
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
139
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
140
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
141
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
142
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
143
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
Farmer's Access to Service
WORKSHEET
144
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture
For further information,
contact:
Dr. P. Chandra Shekara
National Institute of Agricultural
Extension Management
(MANAGE)
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of India
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh
India
Mrs. Sabine Preuss
Programme Director
Natural Resource Management
Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) GmbH
A2/18, Safdurjung Enclave
2nd floor, New Delhi - 110029
India
Mr. Rajiv Ahuja
Technical Expert
Natural Resource Management
Programme
Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) GmbH
A2/18 Safdurjung Enclave
2nd floor, New Delhi, 110029
India


=== BOOK 2: NATURAL FARMING MANUAL ===
ICAR-IIFSR/NMNF-Manual-01/2025
FIELD MANUAL FOR
NATURAL FARMING MODEL FARMS
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF)
ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research, Modipuram
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Citation: Ravisankar, N., Prusty, A. K., Rakesh Kumar, Swarnam, T. P., Raghavendra, K. J.,
Raghuveer Singh, Shamim, M., Meraj Alam Ansari, Sindhuja, P. V. N., Rakshit Bhagat, Sunil Kumar,
A., Velmurugan. & Nayak, A. K. (2025). Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms, National
Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF), ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research, Modipuram,
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) (i-46pp).
Published by : All India Network Programme on Natural Farming, ICAR-IIFSR, Modipuram
Copy right: All rights reserved with the publishers. No part of this publication may be reproduced/
multiplied in any form (including electronic media, such as photocopying, scanning etc.), without proper
written permission of publishers and due credit to concerned authors/editors.
Disclaimer: Publication on Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms are intended solely for
academic, research, and extension purposes. While every effort has been made to ensure accuracy,
authenticity, and completeness of the information presented, the editors, authors, and publishers
assume no responsibility for any inadvertent errors, omissions, or discrepancies.
Printed at: Alpha Printographics (India), Naraina, New Delhi - 110 028
Email Id: alphaprintographicsindia@yahoo.com
alphaprintographicsindia2007@gmail.com
Tel.: 9811199620 / 9999039940
ii
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION (DARE)
AND
Dr M. L. Jat INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH (ICAR)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURAL AND FARMERS WELFARE
SECRETARY (DARE) & DIRECTOR GENERAL (ICAR)
KRISHI BHAVAN, NEW DELHI 110 001
Tel.: 23382629, 23386711 Fax: 91-11-23384773
E-mail: dg.icar@nic.in
Foreword
Agriculture today stands at a crossroads. Increasing climatic variability, declining soil fertility, and the
escalating cost of inputs demand approaches that are both productive and sustainable. Natural farming
— grounded in ecological principles and enriched with scientific validation — offers one such path. It is
not simply a set of alternative practices, but a systems-based approach that harmonises crop productivity
with environmental stewardship and long-term resilience.
By bridging traditional ecological knowledge with modern technical understanding, the manual not only
seeks to improve productivity and farm profitability but also to enhance nutritional security and ecological
balance. This compendium has been developed as a practical and authoritative reference for practi-
tioners, extension personnel, researchers as well as farmers who will find structured methodologies,
measurement protocols, and science-based frameworks to design, assess, and refine interventions. This
work also recognises that farming is a dynamic process. The protocols herein are designed for iterative
application: observe, measure, adapt, and improve.
Natural farming is neither a nostalgic return to the past nor an untested experiment; it is an evolving,
evidence-led practice with the potential to regenerate soils, conserve biodiversity, and enhance rural
livelihoods. As you navigate its pages, you are invited to see this not merely as a manual, but as a field
companion — a living guide that grows with your experience and the changing needs of your land.
It is my sincere hope that this manual will empower to make informed decisions, strengthen local farming
systems, and contribute to a resilient agricultural future that is as productive as it is sustainable.
Dated the 21st August, 2025 (M.L. Jat)
New Delhi Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR)
iii
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
iv
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Prefa ce
Natural farming is more than a cultivation practice—it is a way of working in harmony with nature to
restore soil vitality, enhance crop resilience, and ensure safe, nutritious food for all. Rooted in traditional
wisdom and strengthened by scientific validation, natural farming reduces dependence on synthetic in-
puts and fosters a self-sustaining farm ecosystem.
This field manual has been prepared to serve as a practical guide for farmers, extension workers, and
agricultural practitioners who wish to adopt and promote natural farming methods. It brings together step-
by-step instructions, time-tested formulations, crop-specific recommendations, and integrated pest and
nutrient management practices suitable for diverse agro-climatic zones. The manual emphasizes four
core principles: Soil health regeneration through organic amendments and microbial enrichment; Biodi-
versity enhancement via mixed cropping, trap crops, and beneficial plant associations; Minimal external
inputs by harnessing locally available resources; and Farmer empowerment through knowledge sharing,
cost reduction, and increased farm profitability.
By following the methods outlined here, practitioners can gradually shift towards a farming system that
nurtures the land, conserves natural resources, and improves the livelihoods of rural communities. The
instructions are designed to be simple, field-tested, and adaptable, ensuring that even smallholder farm-
ers with limited resources can be benefitted.
We hope this manual not only provides technical clarity but also inspires a deeper commitment to pro-
tecting our natural heritage. As the challenges of climate change, soil degradation, and rising input costs
continue to impact agriculture, the natural farming offers a pathway towards resilience and sustainability.
(Authors)
v
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
vi
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Ac knowledgement
The authors sincerely acknowledge the vision, guidance, and encouragement provided by Dr. M. L. Jat,
Secretary (DARE) & Director General, ICAR, whose leadership has been instrumental in strengthening
natural farming initiatives across the country. We express our deep gratitude to Dr. A. K. Nayak, Deputy
Director General (NRM), ICAR, for his constant support, technical guidance, and strategic direction in
implementing the National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) Model Farms and research activities
under the NRM Division.
We also thank Dr. A. Velmurugan, Assistant Director General (SWM & AAFCC), ICAR, for his technical
inputs and facilitation of collaborative efforts to enhance the scope and impact of natural farming practic-
es. Our sincere appreciation goes to the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (DA&FW), Gov-
ernment of India, for sponsoring the NMNF–Model Farms and Research projects to the NRM Division of
ICAR, which has enabled the development and field validation of scientific protocols for natural farming.
We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of researchers, field staff, and participating farmers for their
invaluable efforts in implementing, documenting, and refining the practices presented in this Field Man-
ual. Their dedication and hard work form the backbone of this initiative, aimed at promoting sustainable
and eco-friendly agricultural systems for the benefit of present and future generations.
Authors
vii
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
viii
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
CONTENTS
S. No. PARTICULARS PAGE NO.
Foreword iii
Preface v
Acknowledgement vii
Introduction 1
1 Selection of Crops and Varieties 5
2 Tillage and Sowing 7
3 Summer/Fallow Cropping 8
4 Poly/Inter Cropping 11
5 Natural Formulations 13
6 Mulching (Acchadana) 20
7 Whapasa (Soil Aeration) 23
8 Weeding 24
9 Botanical Concoctions - Insect Management 25
10 Botanical Concoctions - Disease Management 31
11 Harvesting 34
References 35
Annexure-I Minimum Data Sets (MDS): Natural Farming 36
Model Farms Natural Farming Model Farms Map
Annexure-II 40
(Agro Climatic Zone Wise)
Natural Farming Model Farms Map
Annexure-III 41
(Agro Ecological Zone Wise)
Natural Farming Model Farms Map
Annexure-IV 42
(Agro Ecological Sub Region Wise)
Name of AU/Research Station identified by States for NF
Annexure-V 43
Model Farms
ix
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
x
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
INTRODUCTION
The National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF), launched as a standalone Centrally Sponsored
Scheme under the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), Ministry of Agriculture &
Farmers Welfare, represents a significant shift towards sustainable, climate-resilient, and safe food
production systems in India. With a total outlay of ₹2,481 crore (₹1,584 crore as Government of India
share and ₹897 crore as State share), NMNF aims to promote nature-based farming practices that
reduce dependency on externally purchased inputs, encourage on-farm bio-input production, restore soil
health, and strengthen ecological balance.
Natural Farming (NF) is not a new concept to Indian agriculture; it builds upon centuries-old indigenous
knowledge, revalidated and enhanced through modern scientific research. The approach emphasizes
the use of on-farm prepared bio-formulations such as Beejamrit, Jeevamrit, Ghanajeevamrit, Neemastra,
Brahmastra, Agniastra, and Dashparni ark, enabling farmers to achieve chemical-free, nutritionally rich,
and ecologically sustainable crop production.
Purpose of the Field Manual
This Field Manual is designed to serve as a practical guide for the establishment, management, and
monitoring of Natural Farming Model Farms under NMNF. It consolidates, standardized input preparation
protocols, field-tested packages of practices (PoPs) for various cropping systems and observations,
ensuring that these farms act as centres of research data collection, demonstration, capacity building,
and farmer-to-farmer knowledge dissemination. Model Farms are pivotal in:
• Showcasing location-specific NF practices adapted to local agro-climatic conditions.
• Demonstrating integrated crop-livestock systems with emphasis on indigenous cattle breeds.
• Serving as training hubs for Community Resource Persons (CRPs), farmers, and extension
personnel.
• Acting as data collection sites for Monitoring, Verification, and Reporting (MVR) under NMNF.
Scientific Foundation and ICAR’s Role
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), through its Natural Resource Management (NRM),
Agricultural Extension, and Agricultural Education divisions, has been spearheading NF research,
education and extension from 2020 under various programmes including the All-India Network
Programme on Natural Farming. Multi-location experiments in 20 locations across 16 States have enabled
the characterization of NF inputs, development of PoPs for major cropping systems, and formulation of
generic NF protocols for adoption across the country. The outcomes include:
• Development and publication of a Technical Manual on Natural Farming in collaboration with the
Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) Division, DA&FW.
• Standardization of bio-input characteristics to support the establishment of 10,000 bio-input centres
1
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
under NMNF.
• Formulation of guidelines for institutional and farmer field model farms.
• Launch of a dedicated NMNF Research Portal for Competitive Research Grants (CRGs) and model
farm tracking.
Scope of Model Farms under NMNF
Under the NMNF framework:
• 400 NF Model Farms are proposed in 25 States (100 at ICAR/State Agricultural University farms and
300 at farmers’ fields) with a budget of ₹555.50 lakhs.
• 530 Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) will establish institutional and farmer field model farms, organize
training programs, and facilitate farmer engagement.
Relevance of the Manual
This Field Manual is a ready reference for:
• Researchers – to align field trials with standardized NF protocols.
• Extension Workers & KVK Staff – to demonstrate, train, and monitor NF practices effectively.
• Farmers – to adopt low-cost, sustainable methods ensuring profitability and environmental
stewardship.
• Policy Implementers – to monitor outcomes and scale up NF adoption in targeted zones.
The Manual aligns with NITI Aayog’s vision of expanding natural farming to 20% of India’s cultivated
area by 2030, contributing to national priorities of soil rejuvenation, water conservation, biodiversity
enhancement, and climate change mitigation. By bridging traditional wisdom with scientific rigor, these
Model Farms will catalyse a nationwide transformation towards chemical-free agriculture.
Conceptual Framework for assessing N atural Farming (adapted from Rao, 2020)
2
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Selection of centres for NF Model Farms:
The selection of centres for Natural Farming Model Farms followed a systematic and inclusive approach
to ensure broad representation and effectiveness. Initially, State Nodal Officers of the National Mission
on Natural Farming (NMNF) recommended suitable centres within their respective states, based on local
expertise, infrastructure, and outreach capacity. These recommendations were aimed at leveraging
existing institutional strengths and ensuring alignment with state-level priorities. Subsequently, institutions
from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) were
identified to provide scientific support and technical guidance. Care was taken to cover all major agro-
climatic zones of the country, ranging from arid and semi-arid regions to humid and high rainfall areas,
ensuring region-specific adaptability of natural farming practices. The selection also considered agro-
ecological diversity, capturing variations in soil types, rainfall patterns, cropping systems, and farming
challenges. This comprehensive coverage allows for the development of location-specific NF models
that can be replicated and scaled across similar environments. By integrating state, national, and regional
strengths, the approach ensures both scientific rigor and local relevance in promoting sustainable farming
systems.
3
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
4
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
01
Selection of Crops and Varieties
• Natural farming promotes crop diversity, having multiple crops grown simultaneously.
• A combination of cereals, legumes, fruits, and vegetables, along with trap/indicator crops such as
marigold, okra, sunflower, etc., on bunds is the preferred choice.
• Avoid monocropping.
• Use recommended intercropping methods suitable for your region.
• Generally, prefer indigenous/traditional varieties; but also use improved varieties within natural
farming practices.
5
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
(Marigold, pigeonpea, okra,
sunflower and pulses)
6
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
02
Tillage and Sowing
• Adopt reduced/no tillage, especially in summer (no till).
• Use shallow tillage (10–15 cm) during kharif and rabi.
• Avoid deep tillage; use manual or shallow mechanical seed drills.
Manual tillage and sowing operations in agriculture
7
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
03
Summer/Fallow Cropping
a) Pre-Monsoon Dry Seeding (PMDS) (rainfed areas): PMDS enables farmers to cultivate crops during
non-farming seasons or when there is no crop cover.
• This method can be practiced before the monsoon, during summer, after Kharif, and before Rabi
planting.
• It involves raising 8 to 15 diverse crops, which fosters better seed germination through Beejamrit
seed coating and improves survival during dry periods.
• Mulching helps capture early morning dew, allowing it to percolate into the soil while minimizing
evaporation.
• PMDS is best practiced from March to May/June, leading into Kharif, Pre-Rabi Dry Sowing
(PRDS), and Rabi crops.
8
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Promoting sustainable farming through PMDS
• Crops from PMDS and PRDS serve as green manure after 35 days, providing cash income,
food, and fodder for livestock.
b) Multivariate cropping (irrigated areas):
- Fields are generally left fallow.
- During summer, green manure crops are planted.
- Common crops include Sesbania aculeata, Sesbania rostrata, and sun hemp.
- Deep tillage is performed prior to planting.
• In natural farming, practice green manuring with crops like Sesbania aculeata, Sesbania
rostrata, sun hemp, or moong, or engage in multivariate cropping during the fallow period
in irrigated areas.
• Utilize no-till or reduced-till methods to keep the soil covered and promote microbial activity
through root exudates.
• Incorporate biomass with varying carbon to nitrogen (C: N) ratios to ensure a longer
decomposition period and extended nutrient release.
• Grow crops of different durations and types, including cereals, pulses, oilseeds, fiber crops,
and green manures, together in a mixed planting system (multivariate cropping).
9
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
• Mix and broadcast a minimum of nine different crop seeds during the summer or fallow
period.
• Use about 25% of the seed rate of a sole crop for each crop in the mix.
• Before sowing or planting the main crop, incorporate the biomass from the multivariate
cropping into the soil after harvesting any economic produce.
• Benefits of multivariate cropping include the reduction of soil-borne pathogens through
annidation and allelopathy.
Growing green manure crops and incorporating before planting the main crop
10
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
04
Poly/Inter Cropping
• Seasonal Guidance
Kharif & Rabi → Practice polyculture/intercropping for soil health and yield enhancement and
nutrient diversity
• Recommended Intercropping
 Proven Methods → Follow recommended row ratios
 Legumes preferred → e.g., pigeonpea, cowpea etc
• Trap & Indicator Crops
o Trap Crops : marigold, okra, sorghum etc
o Indicator Crops : Sunflower
(Plant along bunds & borders)
Multivariate cropping
11
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
• Special Note for Rice Fields
 No intercropping/mulching in fully inundated paddy due to anaerobic conditions.
• Rice Cultivation under Natural Farming
 Intercrop with Dhaincha
 Grow trap crops & legumes on bunds
 Mulch with Azolla
• Azolla + Rice System
 Grow Azolla alongside rice
 Continuous Azolla harvest → extra income for farmers
• Green Manuring with Sesbania
 Sesbania aculeata / Sesbania rostrata
 Incorporate into soil after 30–35 days using cono weeders
• Direct Seeding
 Machines available for simultaneous sowing of rice + green manure
• Benefits of Green Manure Intercropping
o Weed suppression
o Nitrogen fixation
o Improves soil organic matter
NF Model Farms at Rahuri
12
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
05
Natural Formulations
a. Beejamrit (Beejamrutha or Bheejamrutham)
• It is a microbial paste made using 5 kg of fresh dung from desi cows, 5 liters of desi cow urine,
50-100 g of virgin soil (preferably from forests, banyan trees, or termite mounds), 50 g of calcium
chloride, and 20 liters of water.
• The mixture is thoroughly stirred and fermented for 24 hours.
• It is used for seed dressing or dipping seedling roots.
• Seed dressing involves coating seeds with beejamrut before sowing and drying them in the
shade.
• Beejamrut has been shown to protect seeds and young seedling roots from soil-borne and
seed-borne pathogens, reduce germination time, and enhance seedling vigor, leading to better
growth.
• The application of beneficial microbes to seeds effectively places microbial inocula in the soil,
positioning them to colonize seedling roots and protect them against soil-borne diseases and
pests.
• Microbes improve seed germination, shoot and root length, seedling vigor, and crop performance.
• Beejamrut promotes root dry weight and root proliferation, enhancing nitrogen, nutrient, and
water uptake by crop plants.
NF Model Farm in NEH & cover cropping
13
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Flow chart-Beejamrit Preparation and Benefits
14
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Preparation of Beejamrita
b. Ghanjeevamrit:
• It is solid in form and is prepared using ingredients such as desi cow dung (150 kg), jaggery
(1 kg), pulse flour (2 kg), virgin fertile soil for microbial culture (50-100g) and native/desi cow's
urine as required.
• Make a pile of fresh cow dung partially dried up to 3-4 days up to a height of 1.5 feet. Size of the
pile might be as per convenience (say (12 X 3 feet).
• Make holes with a wooden log at a distance of about 1 feet and fill up these holes with already
prepared jeevamrit.
• Turn the dung pile up and down after one week.
• Then again make the holes and fill up these holes with jeevamrut and turn up the pile again after
one week. This way the process is repeated 2-3 times.
• The Ghanjeevamrit will be ready in 30-35 days.
• Then, after pounding it into small-sized particles, it can be broadcasted uniformly in the field or
stored in shade after covering with gunny bags.
15
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Generally, it is recommended to use 800 to 1000 kg per acre as a basal dose. However, this can be
applied as top dressing.
Ghanjeevamrit prepartion
16
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Ghanjeevamrit preparation
17
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
C. Jeevamrit (Jivamrita or jeevamruta or Jeevamrutha or Jeevamrutham):
• It is a fermented microbial culture made from on-farm ingredients: 10 kg of fresh dung from
desi cows, 10 liters of aged desi cow urine, 1.5 kg of cane jaggery (sugar) or sweet fruit pulp,
and 1.5 kg of pulse flour mixed in a barrel with 180 liters of water.
• A handful (50-100 g) of virgin soil from banyan tree areas, forests, or termite mounds is added
as a local microflora inoculant.
• The mixture is stirred daily and fermented for 48 hours in the shade.
• During fermentation, aerobic and anaerobic bacteria in cow dung and urine multiply as they
decompose the organic ingredients.
• Cane jaggery enhances fermentation, and pulse flour provides protein energy.
• Jeevamrit is ready after 3-4 days in summer and 6-7 days in winter and is applied to soil twice
a month at a rate of 200 to 600 liters per acre, depending upon crops and soil conditions,
either through irrigation water or as a foliar spray.
• Application of Jeevamrit or Ghanjeevamrit through drip or sprinkler irrigation is preferred.
• Jeevamrut acts as a catalyst, promoting soil microorganism activity, including earthworms,
and making nutrients available to crops. Indigenous cow dung and urine produce the best
Jeevamrut due to higher beneficial microbial populations.
Jeevamrit Preparation
18
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Preparation and application of Jeevamrit
Handful Water
of Soil
Jaggery Cow Dung
Pulse Cow
Flour Urine
19
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
06
Mulching (Acchadana)
• Types: Soil mulching, straw mulching, and live mulching.
(i) Soil mulching (tillage of the soil as normal, but to a reduced depth of 10-15 cm),
(ii) Straw mulching (spread dried crop residues or straw from the previous crop), and
(iii) Live mulching (raising diverse legume intercrops with cereals for supplying phosphorus,
potassium, and sulphur to monocotyledons, such as rice, wheat, ragi, etc.).
Straw Mulching
• Crop residue mulching should be applied immediately after sowing the crops to reduce the
germination of weeds in the field.
• Depending upon the crop residues, generally 5 to 7 tonnes are required to cover one ha area
for all the crops except rice, in which Azolla should be used as mulching material under natural
farming.
20
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
• Mulching should be done in all seasons.
• Some of the leguminous cover crops which can be introduced in natural farming are spreading
type viz., cowpea, horsegram and calapagonium.
• Application of Jeevamrut through drip/micro irrigation has an accelerating effect on multi/relay
crops, and polythene mulching may also be recommended depending upon the soil condition
and requirement.
Various stages in the formation of a dense Azolla mat
Agro-ecological functions of surface crop residues, positive (+) and negative (−)
effects (adapted from Ranaivoson et al., 2017)
21
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Yet farmers have been practicing several variations of the constitutive ZBNF elements long before the
term was coined. Further, the three components of ZBNF to a greater extent represent the three principles
of modern conservation agriculture (Ranaivoson et al., 2017).
Principles of conservation agriculture (adapted from FAO, 2017)
Mulching and mechanical application of Jeevamrit
22
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
07
Whapasa (Soil Aeration)
• It refers to the soil condition where a balanced concentration of water and air molecules exists in the
crop root zone.
• Natural farming promotes this state of soil condition through the application of minimal irrigation,
reduced tillage, and enhanced soil humus, achieved through residue mulching and the addition of
concoctions.
• By maintaining Whapasa, the water use by crops can be reduced significantly.
• Whapasa soil condition in the crop root zone under field conditions is feasible through application of
jeevamrit using precision technologies such as micro irrigation systems, such as drip and sprinkler
irrigation, including sensors, controllers, etc., to deliver a measured quantity of water with jeevamrit
precisely in the vicinity of roots to achieve optimal soil-water-plant relations.
• Alternate furrow irrigation and surge irrigation can also be adopted. Flood irrigation should be avoided.
Different types of minimal irrigation for Whapasa
23
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
08
Weeding
• Adopt mulching, intercropping, and polycropping to suppress weeds.
• Time and quantity of mulching play a very important role in reducing the weed infestation. Generally
dense mulching with crop residues immediately after sowing is preferred to manage the weeds
effectively in the early stages of the crop.
• Non-Chemical weed management approaches such as hand weeding, shallow hoeing with tools,
reduced spacing of crops, stale seed bed, and other indigenous techniques can also be practiced as
per need under natural farming.
Manual hand weeding and reduced spacing for weed management
24
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
09
Botanical Concoctions - Insect
Management
Natural Farming promotes the use of various kashaya (decoctions) from locally sourced ingredients like
cow urine, neem leaves, green chilies, garlic, tobacco, sour buttermilk, etc., to act as natural fungicides
and pesticides. Some of the prominent ones used are Agniastra, Bramhastra, Neemastra, and Dashparni
ark. Prophylactic spray of these botanical concoctions every 15 days or in a month, depending upon the
crops, is recommended under natural farming.
a. Agniastra:
• Ingredients:
20 L cow urine, 500 g tobacco, 0.5 kg green chili, 0.25 kg garlic, and 5 kg neem leaves
• Preparation:
Boil → Cool → Ferment 48 hrs → Filter
• Usage:
6–8 L in 200 L water → Spray on 1 acre
• Effect:
Controls leaf/stem/fruit/pod borers
• Shelf Life:
Use within 3 months
Jeevamrit application through drip irrigation
25
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Take a Utensil and 20 L Add 0.50 kg of Green Add 0.25 kg of Garlic Add 0.5 kg of Tobacco
of Cow Urine Chilli paste paste
Mix all the ingredients Add 5 kg of Neem Mix it throughly while Mix boiling it a low
thoroughly leaves boiling it a low flame flame, mix it well
While boiling it a low Continue boiling at a low Stop boiling when the Agniastra is ready for
flame, mix it well flame and observe froth froth reaches peak spraying on crops
Preparation of Agniastra (adapted from Rao, 2020)
b. Bramhastra
 Ingredients:
10 L cow urine, 2 kg each of neem, karanj, custard apple, castor, and datura leaves
 Preparation:
Boil → Froth → Filter → Ferment 48 hrs (shade), stir twice daily
 Usage:
6–8 L in 200 L water → 1 acre
NF Model Farm at Srivilliputhur
26
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
10
Preparation of Bramhastra (adapted from Rao, 2020)
 Effect:
Controls sucking pests, fruit & pod borers
 Shelf Life:
Use within 1 month
c. Neemastra
• Ingredients:
o 5 L cow urine, 1 kg cow dung, 5 kg neem leaf paste, 100 L water or 20 L Cow Urine, 2 kg cow
dung, 10 kg neem leaf paste, 200 L water.
• Preparation:
o Ferment 48–96 hrs → Stir twice daily → Filter
• Usage:
o Full volume of 200 L for 2 acre
• Effect:
o Controls sucking pests, and leaf eating caterpillars
27
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Preparation of Neemastra (adapted from Rao, 2020)
d. Dashparni ark
• Ingredients:
o 200 L water, 20 L cow urine, 2 kg dung, 2 kg each of 10 medicinal leaves (Neem, Tulsi,
Mango, etc.), turmeric, heeng, dry ginger, tobacco, chili, garlic
• Preparation:
o Soak, mix, crush → Ferment for 30–40 days → Stir daily
• Usage:
o 6–8 L in 200 L water → 1 acre
• Effect:
o Controls borers, maggots, and caterpillars
Jeevamrit preparation in NF Model Farm in Karnataka
28
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Dashparni ark preparation
29
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Preparation process of Dashparni Ark for insect management
NF experiment under AINP-Natural Farming
30
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
10
Botanical Concoctions - Disease
Management
a. Sonthastra: Natural Antifungal Spray
Ingredients
• 200 g dry ginger
• 5 litres of desi cow's milk
• 200 litres of water
Step-by-Step preparation
Step 1: Ginger Decoction
• Grind ginger into powder
• Mix in 2 litres of water → Boil → Reduce to 1 litre
• Let it cool
Step 2: Milk Preparation
• Boil 5 litres of desi cow milk once
• Cool it
• Remove the cream (can be used at home)
Step 3: Mixing
• Filter both: ginger decoction & milk
• Mix both into 200 litres of water
Application
• Spray the final solution on 1 acre of crop
• Benefits: Controls fungal infections effectively
b. Khatti Lassi (Sour Butter Milk): Natural Antifungal & Antiviral Solution (For 1 Acre)
Ingredients
• 100 litres of water
• 5 liters of khatti lassi (3–5 days old sour buttermilk)
• 1 small piece of copper
31
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
• 50 grams of turmeric powder
Step-by-Step Preparation
• Soak copper in khatti lassi for 3–5 days
• Mix 5 liters khatti lassi + 100 liters water
• Add 50 g turmeric powder and stir well
Application
• Spray the mixture uniformly on 1 acre of crops.
Benefits
• Controls fungal diseases
• Works as a natural virus killer
• Cost-effective & chemical-free plant protection
c. Cow Urine Application: Natural Disease Control
1. Pre-Sowing Use
• Apply 30–40 litres of cow urine
• Mix with irrigation water
• Controls:
• Soil-borne diseases
• Seed-borne diseases
• Seedling & wilt infections
2. Canopy Disease Control (Field Crops)
• Use 10–20% dilution (1–2 L cow urine in 10 L water)
• Spray on crop canopy
• Controls fungal and bacterial infections in foliage
3. Orchard Planting (Fruit Crops)
• At planting:
• Apply 10% cow urine solution in pits
• Mix pits with soil + cow dung/ghanjeevamrit
• Post-planting:
• Spray 10–20% diluted cow urine as per need and at regular interval
Benefits
Natural protection against:
• Soil-borne pathogens
• Canopy diseases
• Wilt and bacterial infections
32
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
• Boosts immunity of plants
• Eco-friendly & cost-effective
d. Saptdhanyankur Ark
Ingredients
• 100 g each of sesame (oilseed) + Moong + Urd + Cowpea +Moth +Gram + Wheat
Step-by-Step Preparation
Step 1: Soaking
• Day 1: Soak sesame overnight
• Day 2: Mix all seeds and soak overnight
Step 2: Sprouting
• Day 3: Drain water (keep it aside); tie seeds in coarse cotton cloth; and hang them inside the
house to sprout
Step 3: Mixing the Ark
• Grind sprouted seeds into a paste (chutney)
• Mix in:
• 200 litres of water
• 10 litres of cow urine
• Soaked seed water
• Stir thoroughly with a wooden stick
Step 4: Fermentation & Filtration
• Cover with a gunny bag
• Leave for 2 hours
• Filter the solution with a cloth
Application
• Use within 48 hours
• Spray during:
• Milk stage of grains
• Infancy of fruits
• Bud stage in flower crops
Benefits:
• Enhances grain shine & weight
• Reduces flower & fruit drop
In addition to the above, depending upon the requirement, mechanical traps, pheromone traps, yellow
sticky traps, bio-control agents such as Trichoderma, Pseudomonas, Trichogramma, Bacillus etc., can
also be used in the natural farming to manage insect and diseases in crops.
33
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
11
Harvesting
• Manual or mechanical harvesting, depending on crop and tools available.
• Adapt post-harvest practices to maintain grain quality and soil health.
Harvesting in NF Model Farm in Uttarakhand
NF experiment at Bhopal
34
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
References
1. FAO (2017). Conservation Agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Viale
delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy. Available at https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/
core/bitstreams/d571cf1a-7ff4-4565-8af9-eb25d198b41a/content
2. https://naturalfarming.niti.gov.in/andhra-pradesh/
3. Hari Om, Baljeet Singh Saharan, Vijay and V.P. Chahal. 2024. Natural Farming and Science, Twenty
First Century Publications, Patiala, p. 191
4. Meena, R.K., Hardev Ram, Anurag Saxena and Rakesh Kumar.2024. Natural Farming: Basics and
Application, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India p.149.
5. Ranaivoson, L., Naudin, K., Ripoche, A., Affholder, F., Rabeharisoa, L., & Corbeels, M. (2017).
Agro-ecological functions of crop residues under conservation agriculture. A review. Agronomy for
sustainable development, 37(4), 26.
6. Ravisankar, N., V. Praveen Rao, J.K. Thakur, R. Krishnan, Meenu Rani, Himanshu Joshi, A.K.
Prusty, M. Shamim, Meraj Alam Ansari, Raghuveer Singh, Raghavendra, KJ, T.P. Swarnam, Azad
Singh Panwar, S. Bhaskar, Sunil Kumar and Rajbir Singh.2024. Science of Natural Farming: Proven
Practices and their role in soil health and sustainability, Journal of the Indian Society of Soil Science,
72 (Special issue): 151-167.
7. Sharma, SK, N. Ravisankar, N.K. Jain and S.K. Sarangi.2023. Natural Farming: Current status,
research and case studies, Indian Journal of Agronomy 68 (XXII Biennial National Symposium
Special issue):S1-S15.
8. Shibasis Mukherjee, Suchana Sen, Md. Nasim Ali, Rupak Goswami, Argha Chakraborty, Krishnendu
Ray, Rantim Bhattacharjee, Bhubaneswar Pradhan, N. Ravisankar, Gautam Chatterjee.2022.
Microbiological properties of beejamrut, an ancient Indian traditional knowledge, uncover a dynamic
plant beneicial microbial network, World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 38 (111): 1-12.
9. Suganthy, M., P. Janaki, E. Parameswari, R.Krishnan, P.S. Kavitha, M. Ramasubramanian and
M.K. Kalarani. 2023. Natural farming: present status and future prospects, Tamil Nadu Agricultural
University, Coimbatore, India p.487
35
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Annexure-I
Minimum Data Sets (MDS): Natural Farming Model Farms
Mandatory Data Sets
S. No. Parameter Method/Device Unit
1. General
Handheld GPS/GNSS receiver or mobile GPS app;
1.1 Latitude degrees
record in decimal degrees; average ≥30 sec fix
Handheld GPS/GNSS receiver or mobile GPS app;
1.2 Longitude degrees
record in decimal degrees; average ≥30 sec fix
GPS altitude/barometric altimeter; cross-check with
1.3 Altitude meter
SRTM/DEM if available
Export waypoints/field boundary from GPS/mobile app
1.4 .kml file -
(e.g., SW Maps, QField, Google Earth) as .kml
Water source – Field survey & farmer interview; GPS-tag well/bore
1.5 -
Ground water locations; photograph
Water source – Field survey & farmer interview; GPS-tag canal/pond
1.6 -
Surface water locations; photograph
2. Below ground
Soil type Field survey & profile description; classify as per
2.1 -
(nomenclature) NBSS&LUP/Soil Taxonomy/WRB
Auger/probe and profile pit measurement at
2.2 Soil depth cm
representative points
Assign soil series using NBSS&LUP soil maps/legends &
2.3 Series -
field correlation
Texture (sand/silt/ Laboratory hydrometer (Bouyoucos) or pipette method on
2.4 -
clay) <2 mm fraction
Undisturbed core method (cylindrical core of known
2.5 Bulk density g/cc
volume); oven-dry at 105 °C
Cone penetrometer (hand/digital) to required depth;
2.6 Penetration m
record peak resistance
SOC at 0–15 and
2.7 Walkley–Black wet oxidation %
15–30 cm depth
pH meter in 1:2.5 soil:water suspension after 30 min
2.8 Soil pH -
equilibration
2.9 EC EC meter on 1:2.5 soil:water extract at 25 °C dS/m
36
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
S. No. Parameter Method/Device Unit
Total N: Kjeldahl; Available N: alkaline KMnO₄
Total and Available (Subbiah & Asija); Available P: Olsen (pH≥7) or Bray-I
2.9 kg/ha
NPK (pH<7); Available K: 1N NH₄OAc extraction with flame
photometer/ICP-OES
Water table level Observation well/piezometer with electric water level
2.10 m
from surface indicator or measuring tape
Fixed quadrat hand-sorting and/or dilute formalin (0.2%)
2.11 Earthworm count no/m²
expulsion; count per m²
3. Above ground (Season-wise for Kharif, Rabi and Summer separately)
3.1 Crop Field record/farmer register -
Seed lot/label & farmer record verification; photo-
3.2 Variety -
documentation
Sowing/Harvest Field log/farmer register; cross-check with photo
3.3 -
date timestamps
Field count using fixed quadrat/row-length at 7–10 DAS;
3.4 Germination %
compute %
Weed count &
0.5×0.5 m (or 1×1 m) quadrat; count species; oven-dry at
3.5 dry weight using g/m²
65 °C to constant weight, type of weeds
quadrat method
Weekly scouting on fixed plants/transects; sweep net/
3.6 Major insects pheromone traps; count per area, Economic Threshhold no/m²
level (ETL)
Visual scoring on standard scales (0–9); incidence/
3.7 Major diseases no/m²
severity from fixed plots, ETL
Soil/root sampling; Baermann funnel/modified Cobb’s
3.8 Major nematodes no/m²
sieving; identification & count
Yield (main/by- Crop-cutting on net plot (e.g., 5×5 m); thresh, dry to
3.9 kg/ha
product) standard moisture; weigh
Field observation & records (flood/basin/furrow/sprinkler/
3.10 Method of irrigation -
drip)
Irrigation water Inline water meter/Parshall flume & time-flow method;
3.11 cm
applied convert to depth (cm)
4. Other details
Standard/automatic rain gauge (AWS/IMD-spec); daily
4.1 Rainfall mm
readings (mm)
Daily RG records aggregated to dekadal/monthly; Rainy
4.2 Rainfall distribution
hyetograph plotting days
37
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
S. No. Parameter Method/Device Unit
Automatic Weather Station or max–min thermometers;
4.3 Temperature °C
daily T_max/T_min
5. Economics
Enterprise budgeting from farm records; include imputed
5.1 Cost of cultivation INR/ha
family labour
Gross: yield × farm-gate price; Net: Gross − Cost of
5.2 Gross/Net returns INR/ha
cultivation
5.3 B:C ratio Benefit–Cost ratio = Gross returns / Cost of cultivation -
man-
5.4 Labour use Daily labour sheets; convert to man-days per hectare
days/ha
Compare baseline vs current input costs; compute %
5.5 Input cost reduction %
reduction
6. Extreme conditions
Incident log with GPS/photo; cross-verify with IMD/State duration
6.1 Flood
disaster reports in days
Incident log; IMD rainfall anomaly; SPI/SPEI indices duration
6.2 Drought
where available in days
Damage scoring on 0–10 scale; photo evidence; IMD 0-10
6.3 Hailstorm
nowcast records scale
Incident record with description, date, GPS/photo; verified
6.4 Others -
with official sources
7. Others
Mandatory upload
Capture via smartphone/digital camera; geotag; compress
7.1 (10 photos + 2 Kb
before upload
videos/season)
Above Ground: Record every crop season at key phenophase (sowing,
Time -
Seasonal vegetative, flowering, harvest)
Below Ground:
Sample before start of interventions (baseline) and at end
Time Baseline & end of -
of each cropping year
cropping year
Optional Data Sets
S. No. Parameter Method/Device Unit
O1 Particulate Organic Size fractionation (sieving/density) to isolate POC; TOC %
Carbon analyzer for C content
38
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
S. No. Parameter Method/Device Unit
O2.1 Boron Hot water extraction; quantify by Azomethine-H mg/100g
colorimetry or ICP-OES
O2.2 Zinc DTPA (pH 7.3) extraction; AAS/ICP-OES determination mg/100g
O2.3 Iron DTPA (pH 7.3) extraction; AAS/ICP-OES determination mg/100g
O3 Soil Microbial Count Serial dilution & pour/spread plating on appropriate CFU/g
media; CFU counting
O4.1 Dehydrogenase TTC reduction to TPF; spectrophotometric measurement µg TPF g-¹
h-¹
O4.2 Phosphatase p-Nitrophenyl phosphate assay; spectrophotometric µmol g-¹
measurement h-¹
O5 Soil microbiome/ DNA extraction; 16S/18S rRNA amplicon sequencing; 16S/18S
metagenomics bioinformatics pipeline
O6 Microbial Biomass Chloroform fumigation–extraction (Vance et al.) with KEC mg/kg
Carbon factor
O7.1 Brix Handheld refractometer on fresh juice/extract %
O7.2 Protein Kjeldahl nitrogen × 6.25 (or NIR calibration where %
available)
O8 Oil Soxhlet extraction (petroleum ether/hexane) or NMR/NIR %
methods
O9 Vitamin A HPLC (retinol/β-carotene quantification) after proper IU/100g
extraction
O10 Soil Arthropods Pitfall traps/soil cores; Berlese funnel for litter extraction; No./m²
count per area
O11 Arthropod Fixed quadrat or pitfall traps along transects; identify and No./m²
biodiversity – mole count
cricket count
O12 Mycorrhizal Root clearing & trypan blue staining; gridline intersect %
Colonization microscopy (Giovannetti & Mosse)
39
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Annexure-II
40
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Annexure-III
41
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Annexure-IV
42
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Annexure-V
NMNF: Model Farms
Name of AU/Research Station identified by States for NF Model
S.No. State
Farm
1 Andhra Pradesh 1. Regional Agricultural Research Stations, ANGRAU, Maruteru
2 Arunachal Pradesh 2. Kiwi Research & Development Centre
3 Assam 3. Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat
4 Bihar 4. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University, Samastipur
5. ICAR Research Complex for Eastern Region, Patna
6. ICAR- NRC on Litchi, Muzaffarpur
7. Bihar Agricultural University, Bhagalpur
5 Chhattisgarh 8. Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur
6 Goa 9. ICAR-Central Coastal Agricultural Research Institute, Goa
7 Gujarat 10. Gujarat Natural Farming Science University, Halol, Panchmahal
11. Dry Farming Research Station -Radhanpur, SDAU, Patan
12. Agricultural Research Station, Talod, SDAU, Sabarkantha
13. Sardar Krushinagar Dantiwada Agriculture University, Dantiwada
14. Wheat Research Station, Bardoli, Nau, Surat
15. Agricultural Research Station, AAU, Sansoli-387130, Kheda
16. Agriculture College, Jabugam
17. Anand Agricultural University, Anand
18. College of Agriculture, NAU, Maktampur, Bharuch
19. Junagadh Agricultural University, Junagadh
20. Navsari Agriculture University, Navsari
21. Agricultural Research Station (Fruit Crops), JAU, Ta- Mahuva,
Bhavnagar
22. Agricultural Research Station, Arnej, Taluka, Dhandhuka, Ahmed-
abad
23. Cotton Research Station, Kukada Farm, JAU, Surendranagar
24. Dry Farming Research Station, Jam-khambhaliya, JAU, Devbhumi
Dwarka
25. Fruit Research Station, JAU, Mangrol, Junagadh
26. Maize Research Station, Bhiloda, SDAU, Arvalli
27. Pulse Research Scheme AAU, Vadodara
8 Haryana 28. Regional Research Station, Karnal
43
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Name of AU/Research Station identified by States for NF Model
S.No. State
Farm
9 Himachal Pradesh 29. Dr. YSP UHANDF, Nauni-Solan
30. CSKHPKV, Palampur
31. College of Horticulture and Forestry, Neri, Hamirpur
32. Regional Horticultural Research and Training Station, Mashobra
33. Regional Research Station, Akrot
10 Jharkhand 34. Birsa Agricultural University, Ranchi
11 Karnataka 35. UAHS, Shivamogga
36. Hiriyur Horticulture College
37. UAS, Raichur
38. Vijayapura Agriculture College
39. University of Horticulture Science, Bagalkot
40. UAS, Dharwad
41. Agriculture College, Bheemarayanagudi
42. Bidar Horticulture College
43. UAS, Bengaluru
44. Munirabad Horticulture College
45. Agriculture College, V.C. Farm, Mandya
12 Kerala 46. Integrated Farming System Research Station, KAU, Karamana
47. Kerala Agricultural University
13 Madhya Pradesh 48. ICAR-National Soybean Research Institute, Indore
49. JNKVV, Jabalpur
50. Agriculture College, Sehore
51. College of Agriculture, Khandwa
52. College of Agriculture, Indore
53. College of Agriculture, Ganjbasoda, Vidisha
54. Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, Gwalior
14 Maharashtra 55. Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri
56. Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth, Dapoli
57. Vasantrao Naik Marathwada Krsihi Vidyapeeth, Parbhani
58. Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola
59. Wheat Research Station, Niphad, Nashik
60. Agriculture Research Center, Kasabe Digraj
61. College of Agriculture, Latur
44
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Name of AU/Research Station identified by States for NF Model
S.No. State
Farm
62. College of Agriculture, Nanded
63. Agriculture Research Station, Waghapur Road
15 Meghalaya 64. ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region, Umiam
16 Odisha 65. ICAR-Indian Institute of Water Management, Bhubaneshwar
66. ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack
67. College of Agriculture, OUAT, Bhawanipatna, Kalahandi
68. College of Agriculture, OUAT, Chiplima, Sambalpur
69. College of Agriculture, OUAT, Bhubaneswar
17 Puducherry 70. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru College of Agriculture and Research
Institute
18 Punjab 71. Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana
19 Rajasthan 72. Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Near Industrial Training
Institute (ITI), Jodhpur
73. Regional Station on Pearl Millet-IIMR, Industrial Area, Gudamalani,
Barmer
74. Agriculture University, Mandore, Jodhpur
75. Adaptive Trail Center, Rajasthan Government, Tabaji Farm, Ajmer
76. Adaptive Trail Center, Rajasthan Government, Abusar, Jhunjhunu
77. Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture & Technology, Pahada,
Udaipur
78. National Research Centre on Seed Spices Tabiji, Ajmer
79. Directorate of Rapeseed-Mustard Research Sewar, Bharatpur
80. Rajasthan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Near
Deen Dayal Upadhyay Circle, Bikaner
81. Post Graduate Institute of Veterinary Education & Research, N.H.
11, Agra Road, Jamdoli, Jaipur
82. Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar, Malpura,
Tonk
83. College of Veterinary & Animal Science, Navania, Vallabhnagar,
Udaipur
20 Tamil Nadu 84. Cotton Research Station (CRS), Srivilliputhur
85. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore
21 Telangana 86. ICAR - Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture, Hyder-
abad
87. RARS, Warangal
45
Field Manual for Natural Farming Model Farms
Name of AU/Research Station identified by States for NF Model
S.No. State
Farm
88. ARS, Kunaram
89. RARS, Palem
90. HRS, Mallial
91. ARS, Karimnagar
22 Tripura 92. State Agriculture Research Station, Arundhatinagar, Agartala, West
Tripura
23 Uttar Pradesh 93. Chandrashekhar Azad University of Agriculture and Technology,
Kanpur
94. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel University of Agriculture and Technology,
Meerut
95. ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research, Modipuram
96. Acharya Narendra Dev University of Agriculture and Technology,
Kumarganj, Ayodhya
97. Banda University of Agriculture and Technology, Banda
24 Uttarakhand 98. GBPUAT, Pantnagar
99. ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil & Water Conservation, Dehradun
25 West Bengal 100. Uttar Banga Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, Pundibari, Cooch Behar
101. Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Mohanpur, Nadia
46
